Akdemir et al. Genetics Selection Evolution  (2015) 47:38 
DOI 10.1186/s12711-015-0116-6

RE SE A RCH

G e n e t i c s
Se l e c t i o n
Ev o l u t i o n

Open Access

Optimization of genomic selection training
populations with a genetic algorithm
Deniz Akdemir1*, Julio I Sanchez1 and Jean-Luc Jannink2

Abstract
In this article, we imagine a breeding scenario with a population of individuals that have been genotyped but not
phenotyped. We derived a computationally efficient statistic that uses this genetic information to measure the
reliability of genomic estimated breeding values (GEBV) for a given set of individuals (test set) based on a training set
of individuals. We used this reliability measure with a genetic algorithm scheme to find an optimized training set from
a larger set of candidate individuals. This subset was phenotyped to create the training set that was used in a genomic
selection model to estimate GEBV in the test set. Our results show that, compared to a random sample of the same
size, the use of a set of individuals selected by our method improved accuracies. We implemented the proposed
training selection methodology on four sets of data on Arabidopsis, wheat, rice and maize. This dynamic model
building process that takes genotypes of the individuals in the test sample into account while selecting the training
individuals improves the performance of genomic selection models.

Introduction
Genomic selection (GS) in animal or plant breeding is
based on genomic estimated breeding values (GEBV).
Prediction of GEBV involves a whole-genome regression
model in which the known phenotypes are regressed on
the markers. For breeding programs with limited pheno-
typing resources, the genotypic information can be used
to select a ‘good’ training set of individuals to be pheno-
typed. Once the phenotypes are measured, a regression
model can be trained to predict GEBV of individuals that
have not been phenotyped. Since phenotyping is a time-
consuming and costly process, selecting a ‘good’ training
population is key to the success of GS.

In this article, we concentrate our efforts on the design
of a training population to maximize the accuracy of the
GS models. We have imagined a scenario in which two
sets of individuals with genotypic information are avail-
able. The first set includes candidate individuals from
which individuals for the training set are selected for phe-
notyping. The prediction model will be trained on this
set. The second set is a test set on which the prediction
model is validated or within which selection is applied
to move breeding forward to the next cycle. We assume

*Correspondence: da346@cornell.edu
1Department of Plant Breeding & Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

that genotyping information of genome-wide markers is
available for all individuals. This scenario is very similar to
that of breeding programs that use GS and calculate GEBV
from a limited number of phenotypic observations. This
scenario is especially useful when phenotyping is expen-
sive and genotypic information is relatively affordable. In
this work, we show that a model building process which
takes genotypes of the individuals in the test sample into
account while selecting the training individuals improves
the performance of prediction models built on a random
sample of the same size.

Note that our method of selection does not require any
phenotypic information. It only requires genotypic infor-
mation about the individuals in a candidate set and a test
set (genome-wide markers or the relationship information
given by a pedigree). Based on genotyping information,
our method selects an optimized training population,
which will be phenotyped after selection. In our study, the
phenotypes are needed only to validate the benefits of the
proposed method and to compare it to the random sample
(correlation coefficients between GEBV and the observed
phenotypes are calculated).

Various regression models have been successfully used
to predict the breeding values in plants and animals [1,2].
In both simulation studies and empirical studies of dairy
cattle, mice and in bi-parental populations of maize, barley
and Arabidopsis, marker-based GEBV are quite accurate.

© 2015 Akdemir et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication
waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise
stated.

Akdemir et al. Genetics Selection Evolution  (2015) 47:38 

Page 2 of 10

However, as training and testing populations diverge, the
accuracies of GEBV decrease [3,4]. Because breeding pop-
ulations tend to change over time, accuracies of GEBV
obtained from the training population decrease over time.
Similarly, in the presence of strong population structure,
GEBV obtained by using sub-populations are usually not
accurate for individuals in other sub-populations.

In breeding, the design of training populations is an
issue that has captured some attention [5,6]. The reliability
measure of VanRaden [7] is expressed as:

where y stands for the phenotype, β0 is the mean
parameter, m is the m−vector of marker genotypes, β is
the m−vector of marker effects and e is the residual term
which is assumed to follow a normal distribution with a 0
mean and variance σ 2
e .

In order to estimate the parameters of this model, we
acquire observations on nTrain individuals from the larger
candidate set. The model is used to generate predictions
on a fixed set of nTest individuals.

Let M be the centered and scaled matrix of marker

K21(K11 + δI)−1K(cid:2)

21,

(1)

where K21 is the matrix of genomic relationships between
individuals in the test set with each of the individuals in
the training set, K11 measures the genomic relationships
in the training set and parameter δ is related to the heri-
tability (h2) of the trait as follows δ = (1 − h2)/h2. This
reliability measure is related to Henderson’s prediction
error variance (PEV) [8] and the more recent coefficient
of determination (CD) of Laloë et al. [9]. These mea-
sures were used in [5] to investigate the issue on training
population design.

Computational cost of calculating the reliability mea-
sure in Equation (1) and the related PEV and CD increase
with sample size. Finding an optimal training population
involves evaluating these measures many times which is
not computationally feasible for large sample sizes [10].
Therefore, it is important to be able to estimate reliability
efficiently. In the next section, we derive a computation-
ally efficient approximation to the PEV based on the prin-
cipal components of the genotypes and use this measure
for training population design. Other efficient methods
for the calculation of these statistics have been discussed
in the literature [7,10,11].

Another major originality of our method compared to
the optimization schemes recommended in [5,6] is that
we calculate the PEV for the individuals in the test set
instead of the candidate set, i.e., we use domain infor-
mation about the test data while building the estimation
model by choosing individuals for the training set such
that they minimize the PEV in the test set. The methods
developed here can be used for dynamic model build-
ing, in other words, for choosing different training sets
to be phenotyped, and hence fitting different estimation
models, as a function of the test set.

Methods
Traditionally, the breeder is interested in the additive
genetic or breeding value as opposed to the total genetic
value. Therefore, a linear model
is assumed between
markers and phenotypes. This is expressed as:

y = β0 + m(cid:2)β + e,

genotypes partitioned as:

(cid:2)

M =

(cid:3)

,

MCandidate
MTest

where MCandidate is the n × m matrix of marker genotypes
for the individuals in the candidate set and MTest is the
matrix of marker genotypes for the individuals in the test
set. Our aim is to identify nTrain training set individuals
from the candidate set (and therefore a matrix MTrain) for
which the average prediction variance for the individuals
in the test set is minimized. Given that we have deter-
mined MTrain and their phenotypes yTrain are available, we
can write:

yTrain = (1, MTrain)(β0, β(cid:2))(cid:2) + e.

Under the assumptions of this model, the uniformly
minimum variance estimators for the phenotypes in the
test data are expressed as:

(cid:4)yTest

= (1, MTest)((1, MTrain)(cid:2)(1, MTrain))−
(1, MTrain)(cid:2)

yTrain,

(2)

where the − denotes the pseudo-inverse of a matrix.
Ignoring the constant term, σ 2
e , the covariance matrix
(PEV) for(cid:4)yTest is

PEV (MTest)

= (1, MTest)((1, MTrain)(cid:2)(1, MTrain))−
(1, MTest)(cid:2)

.

With the emergence of modern genotyping technolo-
gies, the number of markers can vastly exceed the number
of individuals. To overcome the problems due to large m
with small n regressions, several methods such as vari-
able selection, shrinkage of estimates, or a combination
of both have been proposed [12,13]. These methods trade
the decreasing variance to increasing bias due to shrink-
age of individual marker effects to obtain a better overall
prediction performance compared to the ordinary least
squares solution given in Equation (2). Ridge regression
[14] is a commonly used shrinkage method in GEBV pre-
diction [15,16] and the PEV for the ridge regression is
given by:

Akdemir et al. Genetics Selection Evolution  (2015) 47:38 

Page 3 of 10

PEV Ridge(MTest) = (1, MTest)

(3)

((1, MTrain)(cid:2)(1, MTrain) + λI)−1(1, MTest)(cid:2)
for a choice of λ > 0. In order to obtain minimum
variance for our predictions in the test data set, we consid-
ered minimizing the scalar measure tr(PEV Ridge(MTest))
with respect to MTrain when selecting individuals for the
training set.

,

We note that the PEV Ridge(MTest) is related to the relia-

bility measure in Equation (1). First, note that:

(M(cid:2)

Train
= 1
λ

MTrain + λI)−1
(cid:5)
(cid:5)
I − M(cid:2)

MTrainM(cid:2)

Train
Letting δ = mλ, K21 = MTestM(cid:2)
Test

/m and K22 = MTestM(cid:2)

MTrainM(cid:2)
Woodbury matrix identity [17]:

Train

Train

+ λI

(cid:6) −1 MTrain.
/m, K11 =
Train
/m and using the

(A + CBC(cid:2)) = A−1 − A−1C(A−1 + C(cid:2)A−1C)C(cid:2)A−1,

at the third step below, we have

PEV Ridge(MTest)

= MTest(MTrainMTrain + λI)−1M(cid:2)
M(cid:2)

(cid:7)

(cid:7)

Test
(cid:8)(cid:8)−1

MTrain
Train
λ

+ I

= MTest

λ

M(cid:2)

test

MTest

= 1
λ
(cid:9)
I − M(cid:2)

Train

(cid:5)

MTrainM(cid:2)

Train

+ λI

(cid:10)

(cid:6)−1 MTrain

(cid:12)

Test

(cid:11)
MTestM(cid:2)

M(cid:2)
Test
= 1
λ
− 1
λ
MTrainM(cid:2)
∝ K22 − K21(K11 + mλI)−1K(cid:2)

(cid:2)
MTestM(cid:2)
(cid:3)

MTrainM(cid:2)

Train

Test

(cid:5)

21.

(cid:6)−1

+ λI

Train

Therefore, maximizing average reliability is equivalent

to minimizing the total PEV Ridge in Equation (3).

Since we are dealing with a large number of mark-
ers and since any optimization scheme would involve
many evaluations of this objective function, the formula
for the PEV Ridge(MTest) is difficult to use in practice.
A more suitable numerically efficient approximation to
PEV Ridge(MTest) can be obtained by using the first few
principal components (PC) of the marker matrix M
instead of M itself. Let P be the matrix of first k ≤
min(m, n) PC partitioned as:

(cid:2)

P =

(cid:3)

,

PCandidate
PTest

where PCandidate is the matrix of PC for the individuals in
the candidate set and PTest is the matrix of PC’s for the

individuals in the test set. Now, PEV Ridge(MTest) can be
approximated by:

PEV Ridge(MTest)

≈ (1, PTest)((1, PTrain)(cid:2)(1, PTrain) + λI)−1
(1, PTest)(cid:2)

.

(4)

This approximation involves the inversion of a k + 1
dimensional matrix and is computationally efficient com-
pared to the measures in Equations (3) and (1), which
involve the inversion of m + 1 and nTrain dimensional
matrices.

Since many candidate training sets need to be evaluated
in the course of optimization, we preferred the compu-
tationally efficient approximation in Equation (4) over
the exact PEV Ridge(MTest). The scalar measure obtained
by taking the trace of Equation (4) was used to evaluate
training populations subsequently.

Numerous algorithms have been proposed for optimal
design. Most of these approaches combine heuristics with
an exchange algorithm [5,18,19]. The training set design
is a combinatorial optimization problem for which genetic
algorithms [20-22] are particularly suitable. Genetic algo-
rithms use a population of candidate solutions that are
represented as binary strings of 0s and 1s, this popula-
tion evolving toward better solutions. At each iteration
of the algorithm, a fitness function is used to evaluate
and select the elite individuals and subsequently the next
population is formed from the elites by genetically moti-
vated operations such as crossover and mutation. Since
genetic algorithms are particularly suitable for optimiza-
tion of combinatorial problems, we have used one here. It
should be noted that the solutions obtained by a genetic
algorithm are usually sub-optimal and different solutions
can be obtained given a different starting population of
candidate solutions.

In the following section, we evaluate our training pop-
ulation design scheme by fitting a semi-parametric mixed
model (SPMM) [23,24] using the genotypes and pheno-
types in the training set and calculating the correlation
of the test set phenotypes to their predictions based on
this model. In these mixed models, genetic information,
either pedigree- or marker-based, is used to construct an
additive relationship matrix. These models have been suc-
cessfully used to predict breeding values in plants and
animals.

A SPMM for the n × 1 response vector y is expressed as:

y = Xβ + Zg + e,

where X is the n × p design matrix for the fixed effects,
β is a p × 1 vector of fixed effects coefficients, Z is the
n × q design matrix for the random effects; the random
effects (g(cid:2), e(cid:2))(cid:2) are assumed to follow a multivariate normal
distribution with mean 0 and covariance

Akdemir et al. Genetics Selection Evolution  (2015) 47:38 

Page 4 of 10

(cid:7)

(cid:8)

,

σ 2
K 0
g
0 σ 2
In
e

where K is a q × q relationship matrix. To fit the mixed
models, we developed and used the EMMREML package
[25]. The optimization algorithm was also implemented as
an R package called STPGA [26]. Both are available in R
[27]. All other software was also programmed in R and is
available in Additional file 1.

An additive relationship matrix can be calculated from
the centered scaled marker genotype matrix M as K =
MM(cid:2)/m. Given a similarity matrix K, the principal com-
ponents used in our algorithm can be calculated from this
matrix. Therefore, the statistic in Equation (4) can also be
used in cases where only a similarity matrix is available.

For the examples in the next section, we fixed λ at 1/m.
Although this choice is somewhat arbitrary (corresponds
to a heritability value of 1/2), our method is robust to the
choice of this parameter. Forty principal components were
used for the approximation.

A training set of size nTrain in a candidate set of size n
can be identified with a n−vector of 0’s and 1’s, where a 1
at a locus means that the corresponding individual in the
candidate set is in the training set. Therefore, all candi-
date solutions to the optimization problem are vectors of
length n with a total of nTrain 1’s. The genetic algorithm
that we have applied starts with a random set of such
solutions and generates new solutions based on one locus
crossover event between two randomly selected parent
solutions followed by a single random mutation event

Figure 1 Arabidopsis data. The difference between the accuracies of the models trained on optimized populations versus random samples.
Positive values indicate the cases for which the optimized population performed better as compared to a random sample.

Akdemir et al. Genetics Selection Evolution  (2015) 47:38 

Page 5 of 10

(which replaces a 1 to 0 and a 0 to 1) that occurs with prob-
ability 0.5. We used 300 iterations of the genetic algorithm
with population size 800 (which amounts to evaluating
300 ∗ 800 solutions) and selection intensity 5/800 at each
iteration. The training set with the best PEV measure was
taken as the optimized training population at the last iter-
ation. We decided to stop the iterations at 300 because
no improvement in the criterion was observed after about
200 iterations. The solutions from the genetic algorithm
may be suboptimal. To overcome this, in practice, the
algorithm can be run many times, and the individuals that
have been most often included can be used as the training
set.

Results
To illustrate our method, we used several datasets of dif-
ferent origins. The Arabidopsis dataset was published by
Atwell et al. [28] and is available at cynin.gmi.oeaw.
ac.at/home/resources/atpolydb. The wheat
data was downloaded from triticeaetoolbox.org.

The rice data was published in [29] and was downloaded
from www.ricediversity.org/data. The maize
data set was obtained from [30].

Accuracies were obtained by calculating the Pearson’s
correlation coefficient (r) between the raw phenotypic val-
ues and the GEBV for the individuals in the test data set.
The accuracies were not adjusted for trait heritabilities.

In the first two examples, the test individuals were sam-
pled from the same population as the candidate set of
individuals. Remaining examples deal with cases in which
the distributions of the individuals in the test set and
candidate set were not the same.

Example 1. The Arabidopsis data set consisted of indi-
viduals from 199 inbred lines along with observations on
107 traits. Here, we report results for 49 of these traits.
The genotype data set included 216 130 genome-wide
markers.

For each trait, first a test sample of size nTest = 50 was
identified. From the remaining individuals, nTrain = 25, 50

Figure 2 Rice data: accuracies. Comparisons of mean accuracies (measured by correlation) for the traits florets per panicle (FP), panicle fertility
(PF), seed length (SL), seed weight (SW), seed surface area (SSA) and straighthead susceptibility (SHS) for different training sample sizes. Error bars at
three standard error units are also included. Optimized samples outperform random samples almost exclusively.

Akdemir et al. Genetics Selection Evolution  (2015) 47:38 

Page 6 of 10

and 80 were selected in the training population by ran-
dom sampling or by the optimization method described in
the Methods section. The accuracies of the models were
calculated by comparing the GEBV with the observed
phenotypes. This was repeated 50 times and the results
are summarized in Figure 1 (Also see Additional file 2:
Figures S1 and S2). At all sample sizes and for almost all
traits, the optimized samples improved accuracies com-
pared to random samples. In general, the difference was
larger for smaller sample sizes and it decreased as the
sample size increased. The median improvements of accu-
racies were 6, 3.4 and 2.6% for the sample sizes 25,50 and
80, respectively.

Example 2. The rice diversity panel consisted of 400
diverse accessions of inbred lines of rice (O. Sativa) from
82 countries, including many landraces, representing all
the major rice growing regions of the world. This panel
was genotyped with a 44-K SNP chip. Two years (2006
and 2007) and two replicates were used to evaluate each
line for important agronomic traits. This data was first
presented in [29] and was also analyzed in [31]. A more
detailed description of the accessions and geographical

distribution of the rice germplasm is in [29]. We selected
six of these traits for our analysis, namely florets per pani-
cle (FP), panicle fertility (PF), seed length (SL), seed weight
(SW), seed surface area (SSA) and straighthead suscepti-
bility (SHS) and used the phenotypic means of each inbred
line across years and replicates.

For each trait first, a test sample of size nTest = 100
was randomly chosen. From the remaining individuals,
nTrain = 25, 50 and 100 were selected in the training popu-
lation by random sampling or by the optimization method
described in the Methods section. This was repeated 50
times and the results are summarized in Figures 2 and 3.

The left plot in Figure 3 represents the relationships
between the individuals in the test dataset and the indi-
viduals that are most frequently selected in the training
set by the first two principal components of the marker
dataset. The right graph is a neighbor-joining tree based
on the genotypic distance matrix, where each node repre-
sents a genotype and the distances between the nodes are
indicators of the dissimilarities of the genotypes. On this
neighbor-joining tree, we highlighted the lines that were
most frequently selected in training sets.

Figure 3 Rice data: structure. Left: Summary of the rice genotypic data with the first principal components and display lines that were most
frequently selected by the optimization algorithm. Right: Lines that were most frequently selected by the optimization algorithm displayed on a
neighbor-joining tree based on a genotypic distance matrix.

Akdemir et al. Genetics Selection Evolution  (2015) 47:38 

Page 7 of 10

As shown in Figure 3, the optimization algorithm tends
to select individuals that are on average similar to indi-
viduals in the test data set (which amounts to selecting
individuals that are close to the overall mean or sub-
population means), but at the same time it reaches some
degree of diversity in the training set.

The accuracies of the genomic selection models tended
to decrease as the training and test populations diverged.
In each of the examples below, accuracies were better with
the optimized samples for test sets of individuals which
were not random samples from the same population from
which the candidate sets were selected.

Example 3. A total of 5087 markers for 3975 elite
wheat lines in the National Small Grains Collection
(NSGC) were used. In this experiment, the thousand ker-
nel weights were observed for non-overlapping subsets of
individuals over five years (108 individuals in 2005, 416 in
2006, 281 in 2007, 1358 in 2008 and 1896 in 2009). Our
aim was to calculate GEBV of the individuals for each of

the years 2007 to 2009 based on the individuals that were
observed before that year. Genomic estimated breeding
values for a random sample of nTest = 200 individuals in
the current year were estimated using first a random sam-
ple and then an optimized sample of sizes nTrain = 100 or
300 individuals and phenotypes from the years preceding
the test year. The experiment was repeated 50 times and
the results are summarized in Figure 4. The plots in Figure
S3 (see Additional file 2: Figure S3) summarize the geno-
typic data with the first principal components and display
the individuals that were most frequently selected by the
optimization algorithm for specific test years.

The results on accuracies were similar to those obtained
in the previous examples: models from optimized sam-
ples outperformed the models from random samples of
the same size, but this difference decreased as the train-
ing sample size increased. The plots in Figure S3 (see
Additional file 2: Figure S3) show that the selection
scheme prefentially selected different individuals when
the test set was varied.

Figure 4 Wheat data. Comparisons of the mean accuracies (measured by correlation) when the test data set is selected from years 2007 through
2009 for different training sample sizes. For each of these cases, the training set was selected from the individuals in the years preceding the test
year. Error bars at three standard error units are also included.

Akdemir et al. Genetics Selection Evolution  (2015) 47:38 

Page 8 of 10

Example 4. In this example, we evaluated the ability of
estimating GEBV across clusters in a highly structured
Maize data set. This data is described in [30] and was also
analyzed in [31]. The data set consists of 68 120 markers
on 2 279 USA national inbred maize lines and their pheno-
typic means for degree days to silking. First, we divided the
data into five clusters using the Euclidean distance matrix
and the Ward’s criterion for hierarchical clustering. The
numbers of individuals in the resulting clusters were 1317,
184 , 552, 95 and 131 in the first, second, third, fourth and
fifth clusters, respectively.

From each of these clusters, a test data set of size nTest =
50 was selected at random and a training population of
size nTrain = 50, 100 and 200 individuals from the remain-
ing clusters was selected by random sampling or with the
optimization scheme recommended in this article. The
accuracies of GEBV for the trait values in each of these
clusters were calculated for 50 independent replications,
and are summarized in Figure 5. Accuracies varied sig-
nificantly from cluster to cluster; but, on average, the
optimized training set performed better. The plots in

Figure S4 (see Additional file 2: Figure S4) summarize
genotyping data with the first principal components and
show which lines were the most frequently selected by the
optimization algorithm for each cluster as test data sets.

Although the results obtained in the examples described
here suggest that accuracies can be improved by our
method, not all of these improvements were statistically
significant. Results should be interpreted as suggestive
trends.

Discussion
In this article, we address the training design problem
and based on examples, and we show that incorporat-
ing genetic information in the test set when available can
improve the accuracies of prediction models and that our
method is computationally efficient.

Our results show that the accuracy of the prediction
models can be improved if the individuals in the training
population are selected using our scheme, especially when
the required training sample size is small. Models built

Figure 5 Maize data. Comparisons of the accuracies for prediction across clusters in the highly structured Maize data set. Test data set of size
nTest = 50 was selected at random in a particular cluster and a training population of size nTrain = 50, 100, 200 individuals was selected from the
remaining clusters. Error bars at three standard error units are also included.

Akdemir et al. Genetics Selection Evolution  (2015) 47:38 

Page 9 of 10

based on optimized samples are usually more accurate
compared to models built based on random samples of
larger sizes. Larger training sample sizes tend to increase
accuracy, but simulations suggest that, in some cases,
small training sample sizes can be just as accurate [32].
The conditions under which small training sizes retain
full accuracy or possibly increase it, were not explored
here since our main purpose was to select a sample size
that was dictated by a given phenotyping budget. Another
related scenario that was outside the context of this arti-
cle involves identifying individuals that should be further
phenotyped when there is already some phenotypic infor-
mation about these individuals. We intend to address
these questions in future studies.

In our examples, we selected the training populations
separately for each trait mainly because a different sub-
set of individuals was observed for different traits in the
data sets. In practice, it would be better to select a single
training population for all the traits with similar heritabil-
ities because in real conditions phenotyping comes after
this step and the procedure is robust to the choice of the
shrinkage parameter λ, which is a function of heritability.
The robustness was verified by trying different λ values
in the algorithm and comparing the resulting training sets
and it was found to be in line with the conclusions in [5].
Our method is useful when a breeding program can only
phenotype a subset of the available genotyped individuals,
but aims at evaluating the breeding value of a (possi-
bly much larger) group of genotypes. Genomic selection
allows to estimate the breeding value of plants or animals
using genotypic and phenotypic information from a train-
ing population. By replacing random sampling with our
optimized selection scheme while selecting the training
set, the breeding values in the test set can be estimated
with higher accuracies. If the candidate and the test sets
are both randomly selected from the same population,
selecting an optimized training sample from the candi-
dates with our method improves the accuracies of GEBV
for this population. However, the use of our method is also
limited since it requires that all the genotypes are known
in advance and that the individuals that are selected in the
training set are available for phenotyping.

We have discussed the training population design prob-
lem in the context of the regression of continuous traits on
the genotypes based on SPMM. However, our proposed
approach can be used to obtain more accurate prediction
models in the general statistical learning domain. The
bibliography on optimal experiment design in statistical
learning is extensive [19,33,34] and review articles [18,35]
provide a good survey of the area. The methods described
here can be used to find optimal experiment designs
for high-dimensional prediction problems where cost per
individual of measuring or analyzing the response vari-
able is too high, and therefore, a small number of training

examples is required. They are also particularly useful
when the candidate set from which the training set must
be chosen is not representative of the test data set.

Our results indicate that the genetic algorithm scheme
adopted here is very efficient at finding a good solution in
the training population design problem. However, there is
no guarantee that the solutions found by this algorithm
are globally optimal solutions. Since the purpose of the
article was to evaluate the overall improvement over many
replications of the same experiments, we could not afford
to start the genetic algorithm at several different starting
points but it would be safer to do so. After several runs
of the algorithm, we recommend picking the solution that
led to the best value of the utility function or the individ-
uals that were most frequently selected in the training set
for the final training set.

A dynamic model building approach might be more
suitable when the individuals in the test set are structured.
An optimized set of individuals has a better chance of
representing the sub-populations compared to a random
sample of the same size. Accuracies can be improved by
using different models for different parts of the test set,
built on the basis of a subset of individuals that are chosen
from the candidate set by the training population design
algorithm. We intend to explore this and some related
issues in a follow-up article.

Additional files

Additional file 1: R Code. R programs for replicating the analysis in the
paper.
Additional file 2: Figure S1. Arabidopsis data, sample size = 50.
Differences between accuracies from optimized model versus random
samples for sample size = 50. Figure S2. Arabidopsis data, sample size =
80. Differences between accuracies from optimized model versus random
samples for sample size = 80. Figure S3. Wheat data
core. Genotypes selected most frequently by the optimization algorithm.
Figure S4. Maize data core. Genotypes selected most frequently by the
optimization algorithm.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
DA derived the statistics, prepared the program and drafted the manuscript.
JIS helped in writing the manuscript and statistical analysis. JLJ helped in
writing the manuscript and statistical analysis. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the USDA-NIFA-AFRI Triticeae Coordinated
Agricultural Project, award number 2011-68002-30029.

Author details
1Department of Plant Breeding & Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
2Robert W. Holley Center for Agriculture and Health, USDA-ARS, Ithaca, NY,
USA.

Received: 29 May 2014 Accepted: 30 March 2015

Akdemir et al. Genetics Selection Evolution  (2015) 47:38 

Page 10 of 10

References
1. Muir WM. Comparison of genomic and traditional blup-estimated

breeding value accuracy and selection response under alternative trait
and genomic parameters. J Anim Breed Genet. 2007;124:342–55.
Heslot N, Yang HP, Sorrells ME, Jannink JL. Genomic selection in plant
breeding: a comparison of models. Crop Sci. 2012;52:146–60.

2.

27. R Core Team. R: A language and environment for statistical computing.
Vienna: R Foundation for Statistical Computing. 2013. R Foundation for
Statistical Computing. http://www.R-project.org/.

28. Atwell S, Huang YS, Vilhialmsson BJ, Willems G, Horton M, Li Y, et al.
Genome-wide association study of 107 phenotypes in Arabidopsis
thaliana inbred lines. Nature. 2010;465:627–31.

3. Windhausen VS, Atlin GN, Hickey JM, Crossa J, Jannink JL, Sorrells M,

29. Zhao K, Tung CW, Eizenga GC, Wright MH, Ali ML, Price AH, et al.

et al. Effectiveness of genomic prediction of maize hybrid performance in
different breeding populations and environments. G3 (Bethesda). 2012;2:
1427–36.
Crossa J, Pérez P, Hickey JM, Burguenó J, Ornella L, Cerón-Rojas J, et al.
Genomic prediction in CIMMYT maize and wheat breeding programs.
Heredity. 2014;112:48–60.
Rincent R, Laloë D, Nicolas S, Altmann T, Brunel D, Revilla P, et al.
Maximizing the reliability of genomic selection by optimizing the
calibration set of reference individuals: Comparison of methods in two
diverse groups of maize inbreds (zea mays l.) Genetics. 2012;192:715–28.
Elsen JM, de Givry S, Katsirelos G, Shumbusho F. Optimizing the
reference population in a genomic selection design. Proceedings of
WCB13 Workshop on Constraint Based Methods for Bioinformatics 37.
VanRaden P. Efficient methods to compute genomic predictions. J Dairy
Sci. 2008;91:4414–23.
Henderson CR. Best linear unbiased estimation and prediction under a
selection model. Biometrics. 1975;31:423–47.
Laloë D, Phocas F, Ménissier F. Considerations on measures of precision
and connectedness in mixed linear models of genetic evaluation. Genet
Sel Evol. 1996;28:359–78.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10. Misztal I, Wiggans G. Approximation of prediction error variance in

large-scale animal models. J Dairy Sci. 1988;71:27–32.

11. Hickey JM, Veerkamp RF, Calus M, Mulder HA, Thompson R. Estimation
of prediction error variances via monte carlo sampling methods using
different formulations of the prediction error variance. Genet Sel Evol.
2009;41:1–9.

12. Resende MF, Munóz P, Resende MD, Garrick DJ, Fernando RL, Davis JM,
et al. Accuracy of genomic selection methods in a standard data set of
loblolly pine (pinus taeda l.) Genetics. 2012;190:1503–10.

13. Ogutu JO, Schulz-Streeck T, Piepho HP. Genomic selection using

regularized linear regression models: ridge regression, lasso, elastic net
and their extensions. BMC Proc. 2012;6:S10.

14. Hoerl AE, Kennard RW. Ridge regression: Biased estimation for
nonorthogonal problems. Technometrics. 1970;12:55–67.

15. Piepho HP. Ridge regression and extensions for genomewide selection in

maize. Crop Sci. 2009;49:1165–76.

16. Endelman JB. Ridge regression and other kernels for genomic selection

with R package rrBLUP. Plant Genome. 2011;4:250–5.
17. Petersen KB, Pedersen M S. The Matrix Cookbook. 2008.

http://matrixcookbook.com.

18. Pronzato L, Muller WG. Design of computer experiments: space filling

and beyond. Stat Comput. 2012;22:681–701.

19. Fedorov VV. Theory of Optimal Experiments. New York: Academic Press

Inc.; 1972.

20. Holland JH. Genetic algorithms and the optimal allocation of trials. SIAM J

Comput. 1973;2:88–105.

21. Davis LD. Handbook of Genetic Algorithms. vol. 115. New York: Van

Nostrand Reinhold; 1991.

22. Goldberg DE. Genetic algorithms in search, optimization and machine

learning. Delhi: Pearson Education; 2006.

23. de Los Campos G, Gianola D, Rosa GJ, Weigel KA, Crossa J.

Semi-parametric genomic-enabled prediction of genetic values using
reproducing kernel hilbert spaces methods. Genet Res (Camb). 2010;92:
295–308.

Genome-wide association mapping reveals a rich genetic architecture of
complex traits in oryza sativa. Nat Commun. 2011;2:467.

30. Romay MC, Millard MJ, Glaubitz JC, Peiffer JA, Swarts KL, Casstevens TM,
et al. Comprehensive genotyping of the USA national maize inbred seed
bank. Genome Biol. 2013;14:R55.

31. Wimmer V, Lehermeier C, Albrecht T, Auinger HJ, Wang Y, Schon CC.
Genome-wide prediction of traits with different genetic architecture
through efficient variable selection. Genetics. 2013;195:573–87.

32. Habier D, Fernando RL, Dekkers JC. Genomic selection using low-density

marker panels. Genetics. 2009;182:343–53.

33. Pukelsheim F. Optimal design of experiments. vol 50. Philadelphia: SIAM;

2006.

34. Melas VB. Functional approach to optimal experimental design. vol 184.

New York: Springer; 2006.

35. Atkinson AC, Bailey R. One hundred years of the design of experiments

on and off the pages of Biometrika. Biometrika. 2001;88:53–97.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

24. Gianola D, van Kaam JB. Reproducing kernel hilbert spaces regression

• Thorough peer review

methods for genomic assisted prediction of quantitative traits. Genetics.
2008;178:2289–303.

25. Akdemir D, Godfrey OU. EMMREML: Fitting mixed models with known

covariance structures. 2014. R package version 2.0. http://CRAN.R-project.
org/package=EMMREML.

26. Akdemir D. STPGA: Selection of training populations by genetic algorithm.

2014. R package version 1.0. http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=STPGA.

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

