Theoretical and Applied Genetics (2023) 136:30 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00122-023-04265-6

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

A comparison of methods for training population optimization 
in genomic selection

Javier Fernández‑González1 

 · Deniz Akdemir2 · Julio Isidro y Sánchez1 

Received: 30 June 2022 / Accepted: 21 November 2022 / Published online: 9 March 2023 
© The Author(s) 2023

Abstract
Key message  Maximizing CDmean and Avg_GRM_self were the best criteria for training set optimization. A training 
set size of 50–55% (targeted) or 65–85% (untargeted) is needed to obtain 95% of the accuracy. 
Abstract  With the advent of genomic selection (GS) as a widespread breeding tool, mechanisms to efficiently design an 
optimal training set for GS models became more relevant, since they allow maximizing the accuracy while minimizing the 
phenotyping costs. The literature described many training set optimization methods, but there is a lack of a comprehensive 
comparison among them. This work aimed to provide an extensive benchmark among optimization methods and optimal train-
ing set size by testing a wide range of them in seven datasets, six different species, different genetic architectures, population 
structure, heritabilities, and with several GS models to provide some guidelines about their application in breeding programs. 
Our results showed that targeted optimization (uses information from the test set) performed better than untargeted (does not 
use test set data), especially when heritability was low. The mean coefficient of determination was the best targeted method, 
although it was computationally intensive. Minimizing the average relationship within the training set was the best strategy 
for untargeted optimization. Regarding the optimal training set size, maximum accuracy was obtained when the training set 
was the entire candidate set. Nevertheless, a 50–55% of the candidate set was enough to reach 95–100% of the maximum 
accuracy in the targeted scenario, while we needed a 65–85% for untargeted optimization. Our results also suggested that a 
diverse training set makes GS robust against population structure, while including clustering information was less effective. 
The choice of the GS model did not have a significant influence on the prediction accuracies.

Introduction

Genome-wide  selection  or  genomic  selection  (GS)  has 
become a standard tool in plant and animal breeding since 
it was proposed by Meuwissen et al. (2001). In GS, breed-
ing  values  are  obtained  for  quantitative  traits  based  on 

Communicated by Hiroyoshi Iwata. 

 *  Javier Fernández-González 
javier.fgonzalez@upm.es

 *  Julio Isidro y Sánchez 
j.isidro@upm.es

1  Centro de Biotecnologia y Genómica de Plantas (CBGP, 
UPM-INIA), Universidad Politécnica de Madrid (UPM) - 
Instituto Nacional de Investigación y Tecnologia Agraria 
y Alimentaria (INIA), Campus de Montegancedo-UPM, 
28223 Madrid, Spain

2  CIBMTR (Center for International Blood and Marrow 

Transplant Research), National Marrow Donor Program/Be 
The Match, Minneapolis, USA

genome-wide markers by the estimation of marker (or line) 
effects in a single or two steps (Isidro et al. 2011; Crossa 
et al. 2017; Karimi et al. 2019). It has been demonstrated 
that selection of an optimized training set is a critical factor 
for accurate genomic predictions (Zhong et al. 2009; Lorenz 
and Smith 2015; Zhang et al. 2019; Akdemir and Isidro-
Sánchez 2019).

Training set optimization consists of selecting a training 
set as an optimal subset of the candidate set. The candidate 
set contains all available genotypes, and the genotypes of the 
candidate set that are not included in the training set belong 
to the remaining set. The optimization aims to maximize 
the accuracy of the predictions made on a test set while 
minimizing the size of the training set, which reduces phe-
notyping costs. More details about training set optimiza-
tion schemes are available in Isidro y Sánchez and Akdemir 
(2021), Rio et al. (2022).

The training set optimization under the GS framework 
started with Rincent et al. (2012) who introduced the mean 
of the coefficient of determination (CDmean) and the mean 

Vol.:(0123456789)1 3 
 
30  Page 2 of 20

Theoretical and Applied Genetics (2023) 136:30

of the prediction error variance (PEVmean) (Laloë 1993) 
as two related optimization criteria. These two criteria have 
been widely used in the literature (Rincent et al. 2012; Isidro 
et al. 2015; Akdemir et al. 2015; Bustos-Korts et al. 2016; 
Rincent et al. 2017; Neyhart et al. 2017; Momen and Morota 
2018; Akdemir and Isidro-Sánchez 2019; Ou and Liao 2019; 
Mangin et al. 2019; Guo et al. 2019; Mendonça and Fritsche-
Neto 2020; Olatoye et al. 2020; Roth et al. 2020; Sarinelli 
et al. 2019; Tayeh et al. 2015; Atanda et al. 2021; Ben-Sad-
oun et al. 2020; Heslot and Feoktistov 2020; Akdemir et al. 
2021; Kadam et al. 2021; Rio et al. 2021b), but many other 
alternatives have been developed, such as uniform sampling 
(Bustos-Korts et al. 2016), optimal design algorithms such 
as A-opt and D-opt (Akdemir and Isidro-Sánchez 2019), 
estimated  theoretical  accuracy  (EthAcc)  (Mangin  et  al. 
2019), upper bound of reliability (Karaman et al. 2016; Yu 
et al. 2020), Rscore (Ou and Liao 2019), algorithms that 
maximize the relationship between training set and the test 
set (Rincent et al. 2017; Roth et al. 2020; Atanda et al. 2021), 
maximization of connectedness and diversity (MaxCD) for 
hybrid breeding (Guo et al. 2019), stratified sampling (Isidro 
et al. 2015), fast and unique representative subset selection 
(FURS) and partitioning around medoids (PAM) (Guo et al. 
2019). These optimization methods can be classified based 
on whether (targeted) or not (untargeted) they take into 
consideration the information about the test set while build-
ing the training set (Akdemir and Isidro-Sánchez 2019). In 
the literature, we can find some comparisons among opti-
mization methods. For example, stratified sampling outper-
formed CDmean and PEVmean under a strong population 
structure (Isidro et al. 2015). Other criteria such as A-opt, 
D-opt, and uniform sampling (Akdemir and Isidro-Sánchez 
2019; Bustos-Korts et al. 2016) performed similarly to CD 
and PEVmean. Maximization of connectedness and diversity 
(Guo et al. 2019) outperformed CD and PEVmean, but it can 
only perform targeted optimization and is very specific for 
hybrid breeding. The estimated theoretical accuracy (Man-
gin et al. 2019) also outperformed CDmean but needed to 
start the optimization from a close to optimal solution. Other 
methods, Rscore (Ou and Liao 2019), FURS, PAM, (Guo 
et al. 2019; Rio et al. 2021b), maximizing the relationship 
between the training and the test sets (Rincent et al. 2017; 
Atanda et al. 2021; Roth et al. 2020) usually showed similar 
results than CDmean and PEVmean. In general, these com-
parisons had some drawbacks, i.e., (i) optimization methods 
could not perform under all the training set optimization 
scenarios i.e., untargeted vs. targeted optimization, (ii) they 
could not always start optimization from a random solu-
tion, (iii) the comparisons between optimization methods did 
not include the whole set of options under the same dataset 
conditions, and (iv) each comparison took place in only 1–2 
datasets. Once the training set has been built using the dif-
ferent methods proposed in the literature, the breeders must 

update it with the new information coming from the breed-
ing pipeline. For updating the training population, Neyhart 
et al. (2017) proposed a different approach to the use of 
training set optimization algorithms. Neyhart et al. (2017) 
selected the individuals with top and/or bottom genotypic 
values and added them to the existing training set. This 
approach outperformed CDmean and PEVmean, although it 
is important to note that it is not an optimization problem but 
a model selection problem, since to be able to compute the 
genotypic values the phenotypic information must be pro-
vided from a pre-existing training set from previous cycles.
In this study, we aim to establish a comprehensive guide-
line for training set optimization by comparing a wide range 
of optimization methods under different datasets, genetic 
architectures, heritability values, and levels of population 
structure to establish a training set optimization guideline for 
its implementation in plant breeding programs. In addition, 
optimization methods are usually employed to optimize the 
composition of the training set, but they can also be used 
to optimize its size. Therefore, here we will test the perfor-
mance of the different methods in the optimization of both 
the training set size and its composition. It is important to 
note that in this study we will only address training set opti-
mization when both the training set and the test set belong 
to the same population. Further research will be needed for 
the scenario in which the training set and the test set belong 
to independent populations.

Materials and methods

Datasets

Table 1 summarizes the key features of the seven datasets 
covering 6 species that were used in this study. We used 
published datasets with contrasting characteristics that were 
previously studied to evaluate GS models. The number of 
genotypes in these datasets ranged from 327 to 5014, the 
number of markers from 4234 to 244781, and the number 
of environments from 2 to 4. The genotypes were genotyped 
with RNAseq, genotype by sequencing (GBS), single nucle-
otide polymorphism arrays, and exome capture sequencing. 
The raw phenotypic data for some of these datasets was not 
available. Therefore, we used the genotypic values of the 
lines for the available traits in the form of best linear unbi-
ased predictors (BLUPs) as the trait values to be predicted. 
More details about the experiments can be found in the orig-
inal studies (Table 1). Furthermore, a simulated trait with 
the heritability value of 0.5 was generated for each dataset 
using random marker effects and residuals to check if the 
training set optimization methods performed similarly using 
the simulated and real traits. A different simulated trait was 
randomly generated for each iteration of the cross-validation.

1 3 
Theoretical and Applied Genetics (2023) 136:30 

Page 3 of 20  30

Table 1   Summary of the datasets used in this project.

Dataset

Traits

# Genotypes # Markers Marker Type # Env Heritability

Reference

Maize

HT, FT, YLD

391

244,781

RNAseq

Rice

HT, FT, YLD

327

57,542

GBS

RicePopStr HT, FT, FP, PC 357

36,901

SNPchip

Sorghum
Soybean

HT, MO, YLD 451
HT, R8, YLD

5014

56,299
4234

GBS
SNPchip

Spruce

HT, DBH, DE

1722

6930

SNPchip

Switchgrass HT, ST, AN

514

217,150

ECS

2

4

2

2
2

2

2

–

Hirsch et al. (2014), Hansey 

et al. (2011)

0.30–0.35, 0.33–0.44, 

Spindel et al. (2015)

0.31–0.32

0.81, 0.73, 0.69, 0.50

Zhao et al. (2011), Guo et al. 

0.29–0.88, 0.67, 0.26
0.48–0.52, 0.32–0.37, 

0.41–0.49

(2014)

Fernandes et al. (2018)
Xavier et al. (2016)

0.39–0.57, 0.32–0.39, 

Beaulieu et al. (2014)

0.33–0.34

–

Evans et al. (2018), Lipka et al. 

(2014)

#Genotypes; the number of lines, #Markers; the number of markers, #Env; the number of environments, GBS; genotyping by sequencing, ECS; 
exome capture sequencing, HT; plant height, FT; flowering time, YLD; yield, FP; florets per panicle, PC; protein content, MO; moisture content, 
R8; days to maturity, DBH; diameter at breast height, DE; density, ST; standability, AN; anthesis date. The values in the heritability column 
(when present) are displayed in the same order as the traits to which they correspond, and they have been taken from the cited papers. For some 
traits a range of heritabilities is given and they correspond to measurements in different environments or at different times. RicePopStr indicates 
rice germplasm with a high population structure.

Training set optimization methods

Table S1 shows a summary of the training set selection 
methods used in this study and the equations used to imple-
ment them. We selected stratified sampling (StratSamp, 
Isidro  et  al.  (2015)),  mean  coefficient  of  determination 
(CDmean, Laloë (1993), Rincent et al. (2012)), Rscore (Ou 
and Liao 2019), generalized average genomic relationship 
(gAvg_GRM, derived from Atanda et al. (2021)) and par-
titioning around medoids (PAM, Guo et al. (2019)) as the 
main methods for comparison. It is important to note that 
all the aforementioned methods except StratSamp and PAM 
are evaluation criteria for a training set, and they have to 
be used in combination with a search heuristic that selects 
which training sets will be evaluated. In this work we used 
TrainSel (Akdemir et al. 2021), which combines a genetic 
algorithm and simulated annealing (Table S1). We based our 
selection of methods on the following criteria, (i) the wide 
use in the literature (ii) the suggestions for comparisons in 
other research studies (iii) the complexity of the analysis, 
and (iv), the ability to produce a comprehensive study with-
out selecting all the possible combinations. In this sense, 
we omitted methods such as PEVmean because results have 
demonstrated that it is very similar to CDmean (Neyhart 
et al. 2017; Akdemir and Isidro-Sánchez 2019; Kadam et al. 
2021). We did not include the upper bound of reliability 
(U) (Karaman et al. 2016) because our preliminary analy-
sis (Fernández González 2021) showed that it i) struggled 
to reach the performance of CDmean and PEVmean, and 
ii) the use of the marker data instead of the relationship 
matrix made it slower than other alternatives. The estimated 

theoretical accuracy (Mangin et al. 2019), needed an opti-
mal training set as a starting point, so we discarded it in 
this research study. Tails and Top methods (Neyhart et al. 
2017) were not included because they are suited to update 
the training set, not to design one de novo without a preex-
isting training set from previous generations used to calcu-
late the genomic estimated breeding values (GEBVs) of the 
candidate set.

Next, we will briefly describe the different methods used 
in  this  study  (summarized  in  supplementary  materi-
als, Table S1). For more information check the original 
references:

Stratified sampling: this method consists of dividing the 
candidate set into previously identified clusters and taking 
a random sample from them. The number of individuals 
sampled from each cluster is proportional to the total size 
of the cluster (Isidro et al. 2015). We performed hierarchi-
cal clustering using the R function “hclust” with the ward.
D2 method. The number of clusters was decided using the 
information in the literature (Hansey et al. 2011; Spindel 
et al. 2015; Zhao et al. 2011; Fernandes et al. 2018; Xavier 
et al. 2016; Beaulieu et al. 2014; Lipka et al. 2014) com-
bined with the tree generated by hierarchical clustering and 
a visualization of the clusters in the genetic space. We have 
defined genetic space as a multivariate space in which every 
genotype of a dataset is characterized by its genome-wide 
markers encoded in a numeric form. Insight into this space 
can be obtained through dimensionality reduction. Principal 
component analysis (PCA) on the multivariate marker data 

1 330  Page 4 of 20

Theoretical and Applied Genetics (2023) 136:30

allows summarizing a substantial amount of the existing 
variance in the genetic space in a new 2-dimensional space 
consisting of the first 2 principal components (PCs), which 
can be plotted and interpreted.

Partitioning around medoids (PAM): this algorithm is cen-
tered around a dissimilarity matrix that contains the pairwise 
Euclidean distance between all genotypes in the dataset. 
These distances have been calculated from genome-wide 
marker data. The candidate set is divided into as many clus-
ters as individuals will be in the optimized training set in 
such a way that the sum of dissimilarities within the clusters 
is minimized (see Table S1). The individuals sampled for 
the training set are the medoids that represent each cluster 
(Guo et al. 2019).

Mean coefficient of determination (CDmean): The coeffi-
cient of determination is the expected correlation between 
the true and predicted genotypic values. For more infor-
mation, see Laloë (1993) and Rincent et al. (2012). It can 
be used to measure the suitability of a training set to make 
predictions over a target population. We set that the target 
population was the test set for targeted optimization and 
the remaining set for untargeted optimization. Training set 
optimization can be performed by maximizing CDmean. 
The implementation of CDmean we used was described 
by Rio et al. (2021a) and it can be seen in Table S1, with 
1 as the value for the shrinkage parameter ( 𝜆 ). We further 
performed two variations of CDmean to take into account 
the population structure of the datasets (Isidro et al. 2015). 
Firstly, within cluster CDmean (WIClustCDmean) consists 
of dividing the dataset into the same clusters used for strati-
fied sampling and performing training set optimization in 
each of them independently from one another. Then, the 
optimized training sets for each cluster are taken together 
to obtain the desired combined training set. Secondly, over-
all clustered CDmean (OvClustCDmean) is similar to the 
standard CDmean with the additional constraint that, in the 
optimized training set, the number of individuals from each 
cluster is forced to be proportional to the cluster size in the 
candidate set. For further details, a diagram showing the 
differences between the CDmean variants can be found in 
supplementary materials, Figure S1.

Rscore: this criterion is derived from Pearson’s correlation 
between the GEBVs and the phenotype, and it has to be 
maximized during optimization (see equation at Ou and Liao 
(2019) or Table S1). A matrix X containing the genome-
wide marker data (columns) for all individuals in the dataset 
(rows) is used as input for the calculation of Rscore, and 
it can be modified to accelerate optimization by replacing 
the markers in X with its principal components (PCs). In 
this study, we used as many PCs as genotypes were in the 

dataset. Similarly to CDmean, Rscore evaluates training set 
that will be used to make predictions over a target popula-
tion. We considered that the target population was the test set 
in targeted optimization and the candidate set in untargeted 
optimization.

Generalized average genomic relationship (gAvg_GRM): 
The  calculation  of  gAvg_GRM  relies  on  a  relationship 
matrix A and it has to be maximized during optimization. 
We propose this criterion to balance the maximization of 
the relationship between the training set and the test set and 
the minimization of the relationship within the training set 
(Pszczola et al. 2012). It is important to note that the maxi-
mization of the relationship between the training set and test 
set is only possible in the targeted scenario. In untargeted 
optimization, as the marker data for the test set is unavail-
able, a target population different to the test set such as the 
candidate set or the remaining set has to be used as a place-
holder. In this sense, gAvg_GRM could be expressed as:

gAvg_GRM =a ⋅ mean(A_TRS;TP)

− b ⋅ mean(A_TRS;TRS)

(1)

where TRS and TP are the training set and target popula-
tion respectively, A_TRS;TRS is the relationship matrix for 
the individuals in the training set, A_TRS;TP is a subset 
of the relationship matrix whose rows and columns corre-
spond to the individuals in the training set and target popu-
lation respectively and mean(⋅) indicates that the average 
of all elements of a matrix is calculated. This metric can 
be tuned depending on what weight is given to the rela-
tionship between the training set and the target population 
using the pondering parameters a and b (Table S1). We 
have tested 3 combinations of these parameters. Firstly, we 
focused only on the relationship training set–target popula-
tion ( a = 1, b = 0 ). This is the original criterion described 
by  Atanda  et  al.  (2021),  called  Avg_GRM.  Next,  we 
focused on minimizing the relationship within the training 
set ( a = 0, b = 1 ) and we called it Avg_GRM_self. Finally, 
we tested a balanced approach, Avg_GRM_MinMax, with 
parameters a = 1, b = 1 .  As  explained  before,  the  target 
population  should  always  be  the  test  set  in  the  targeted 
scenario, but a different target population has to be used in 
untargeted optimization. In the untargeted scenario we used 
the candidate set as target population for Avg_GRM and the 
remaining set for Avg_GRM_MinMax. The reason behind 
this difference is that, as the candidate set contains the train-
ing set, using it as target population for Avg_GRM_MinMax 
could result in a lowered penalization for a high relation-
ship between the individuals in the selected training set. It 
is important to highlight that for Avg_GRM_self, targeted 
optimization is not possible as the target population is not 
taken into account in its calculation.

1 3 
Theoretical and Applied Genetics (2023) 136:30 

Page 5 of 20  30

Models

In this study, we tested three different models. Two of them 
were additive models: GBLUP (Karimi et al. 2019) is com-
monly used in GS and assumes that the trait is controlled by 
many small-effect quantitative trait loci (QTL) distributed 
throughout the genome. BayesB (Meuwissen et al. 2001) 
has the prior assumption that the trait is controlled by a few 
QTL with large effects. The third model can accommodate 
for interaction effects: RKHS (Gianola and van Kaam 2008) 
model is similar to GBLUP substituting the additive rela-
tionship matrix (A) with a kernel matrix (K) calculated using 
a Gaussian kernel. More details about the GS models used 
can be found in supplementary materials, Note 1.

Cross‑validation scheme

The cross-validation scheme allows to evaluate the perfor-
mance of the different methods for optimizing the training 
set composition for different training set sizes. Next, the 
results will also be used to explore how the training set size 
could be optimized.

The first step in the cross-validation consisted of ran-
domly splitting each dataset into a candidate set (85% of the 
dataset) and a test set (the remaining 15%). Next, the train-
ing set, which is a subset of the candidate set, was selected 
through random sampling and training set optimization. 
Random sampling was used as a baseline to which the dif-
ferent training set optimization methods can be compared. 
The optimization was carried out for both untargeted (no 
information about the test set used) and targeted (informa-
tion about the test set used) optimization when possible and 
several training set sizes were tested (10, 20, 40, 60, 80 and 
100% of the candidate set). Genomic selection models were 
built upon every training set obtained. GBLUP, BayesB, and 
RKHS were tested, and all 3 models were trained for every 
trait in the dataset, every training set optimization method, 
and every training set size. Finally, model accuracies were 
calculated as the correlation between the predictions of the 
model (GEBVs) and the genotypic values in the test set.

The  accuracy  comparisons  and  other  results  were 
obtained from an average of 40 replications of the cross-
validation (CV) scheme.

We applied this CV scheme for all datasets except soy-
bean, since its number of genotypes (5014) was too high 
and dimensionality reduction was needed to decrease the 
computational burden. First, for each iteration, we split the 
dataset into test set (15%) and candidate set (85%). Then, 
we used untargeted CDMEAN2 to preselect 1000 genotypes 
which would act as a reduced candidate set. Finally, we pro-
ceeded as normal with training set optimization using the 
reduced candidate set. We used CDMEAN2 for the preselec-
tion step because it is a modification of CDmean which can 

be accelerated by incorporating dimensionality reduction via 
PCA (more details in Akdemir (2017) and Table S1).

Area under the curve calculation

The area under the curve (AUC) was used to summarize the 
results of the cross-validation. It is important to clarify that 
this AUC is not related to the commonly used area under 
the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve. For each 
optimization method, model and dataset-trait combination, 
the accuracy can be plotted against the training set size, as 
has been done in Fig. 2. AUC is the estimation of the area 
under a curve that would follow the discrete accuracy values 
available between training set size = 10% of the candidate 
set and training set size = 80% of the candidate set. Training 
set size = 100% of the candidate set is omitted because no 
optimization can take place for it as the entire candidate set 
is selected. Equation 2 shows how AUC is calculated:

AUC =

nTRS−1

∑n=1 [

accn + accn+1
2

⋅ (sizen+1 − sizen)

]

(2)

where nTRS = 5, which is the number of training set sizes 
considered; sizen is the training set size corresponding to n 
and accn is the accuracy obtained for sizen. The advantage of 
using AUC is that it allows summarizing the performance of 
an optimization method across training set sizes in a single 
value.

Optimization of the training set size

The previously explained evaluation criteria used for the 
optimization  of  the  training  set  composition  were  also 
employed to optimize its size due to their ability to function 
as an evaluation metric for a given training set. The criteria 
tested in this role were Avg_GRM_self in the untargeted 
scenario, Avg_GRM_MinMax for targeted optimization, 
and CDmean and Rscore in both scenarios. To this end, the 
first step was evaluating the training set obtained during 
the cross-validation using the aforementioned criteria. For 
instance, the value of Avg_GRM_self was calculated for the 
training set obtained through optimization with Avg_GRM_
self for all the tested training set sizes (10, 20, 40, 60, 80 and 
100 % of the candidate set) in the 40 iterations of the cross-
validation. Next, the value of the evaluation metric was plot-
ted against the training set size (supplementary materials, 
Figures S25–S30) and the following function was fitted to it:

evaluation_metric =

ln(size − d)
m(size − d)p

+ n

(3)

where d, m, p and n are the parameters used to fit the func-
tion to the observed data, size is the size of the training set 

1 330  Page 6 of 20

Theoretical and Applied Genetics (2023) 136:30

and ln is the natural logarithm. Equation 3 was chosen for 
its ability to fit the 3 types of curve observed (Ratkowsky 
1993): rapid growth followed by slower growth ( p < 0.5 ), 
fast growth followed by a plateau ( 0.5 < p < 1 ) and rapid 
growth followed by a slow decline ( p > 1 ) (Figures S25 
- S30). Optimization per se was only possible in the latter 
type of curve, as it is the only one with a maximum within 
the range of tested training set sizes. For the rest, the fitted 
function was always increasing, which makes actual opti-
mization impossible. Instead, we selected the training set 
size that would result in an acceptable accuracy loss. To that 
end, we used the fitted function (Eq. 3) to select the training 
set sizes for which the evaluation metric reached 95% and 
99% of the value it had for the entire candidate set, aiming 
to find a training set able to generate a GS model with a 
target accuracy of 95% and 99% of the maximum accuracy 
obtained when the entire candidate set is the training set. 
This assumes that the evaluation metric and the actual accu-
racy are correlated, and this assumption had to be validated 
using the cross-validation results to interpolate the accuracy 
that would have been obtained with the selected training set 
sizes. This analysis was performed in all datasets except for 
the soybean data, as we do not have the complete informa-
tion across the entire range of training set sizes due to the 
preselection step as explained in the cross-validation section.

Statistical software and hardware used

All calculations were implemented using R programming 
language version 3.6.1 (R Core Team 2021). The data and 

code used are available in https:// github. com/ TheRo cinan  
te- lab/ Publi catio ns/ tree/ main/ 2022/ Ferna ndez- Gonza lez_  
et_ al_ 2022_ Compa rison. We used TrainSel for training set 
optimization (Akdemir et al. 2021), rrBLUP (Endelman 
2011), BGLR (Pérez and de los Campos 2014) for model-
ling, agricolae package (de Mendiburu and Yaseen 2020) to 
calculate AUDPC, and nlsLM in minpack.lm package to fit 
Eq. 3 to the observed values in the training set size optimi-
zation. We ran our analysis in a cluster with Lenovo Think 
system SD530 compute nodes with the following charac-
teristics: 2 ×  Intel®  Xeon® Gold 6230 20C 2,1 GHz Cache 
20 Cores, 12 x 16 GB DDR4 2666 MHz ECC Reg, 2 × 
ThinkSystem 2.5” Intel S4510 240 GB and RAID 930-8i 2 
GB Flash PCIe 12 Gb Adapter.

Results

Population structure

The population structure and the clustering of the datasets are 
displayed using the first two principal components (PCs) in 
Fig. 1. These results indicate that not all datasets presented the 
same population structure. Maize, rice, soybean, and spruce data-
sets showed weak population structure, as their first two PCs 
explained less than 11% of the genetic variability. Sorghum and 
switchgrass had an intermediate level of population structure, 
with between 20 and 30% of the genetic variance explained, and 
ricePopStr had the strongest level of population structure with 
close to 50% of the genetic variance. Population sizes within 

Fig. 1   Plots  of  the  first  two  principal  components  and  the  cluster  (c)  analysis  on  all  datasets.  Each  solid  circle  represents  a  genotype  and  the 
colors indicate cluster membership. Number of genotypes per cluster are given by the figure legends in brackets

1 3 
Theoretical and Applied Genetics (2023) 136:30 

Page 7 of 20  30

clusters varied from 12 in ricePopStr to 2298 in the soybean data-
set. The soybean dataset’s shape is because it is derived from 40 
biparental families. The spruce dataset showed weak population 
structure, but individuals could be separated into small subpopu-
lations within clusters (Fig. 1C).

here just the simplest model (GBLUP) or the average across 
models to make comparisons between optimization methods.

Cross‑validation results for the optimization 
methods

Model performance

The performances of the different models tested were very simi-
lar across datasets and different training sets (see supplementary 
materials, Table S2). On average, RKHS showed the highest 
accuracy (0.463) followed by BayesB (0.462) and GBLUP 
(0.457), although there were no great differences between them. 
Our results also indicated that the choice of a model barely had 
any influence on the performance of the training set optimi-
zation methods as can be seen in the Tables S32–S52, where 
the differences in the average performance of the optimization 
methods across models were hardly ever greater than the stand-
ard error of the mean (SEM). As a consequence, we reported 

Figure 2 shows the comparison of the mean predictive abil-
ity for different training set optimization methods across the 
different training set sizes for yield in the sorghum dataset. 
The results for all dataset-trait combinations are available 
in Tables S3–S31. The accuracies in Fig. 2 ranged from 
0.20 to 0.39. The smaller the training set sizes, the larger 
the differences between random sampling and optimiza-
tion criteria. Maximum accuracies were obtained with the 
largest training set size, although the differences between 
the lowest and the largest training set size were less than 
16% on average across optimization methods. If we com-
pare training sets of size 80% vs. 40% across optimization 
criteria, then the differences drop to 5%. As a general trend, 

Fig. 2   GBLUP  prediction  accuracies  for  yield  trait  in  the  Sorghum 
dataset.  Each  value  is  the  average  over  the  40  repetitions  with  their 
standard  errors  of  the  mean.  Five  different  training  set  sizes  10%, 
20%, 40%, 60% and 80% of the total candidate set size were used for 

the  optimization.  We  also  used  the  100%  of  the  candidate  set  in  the 
cross-validation,  which  does  not  involve  optimization.  Avg_GRM  is 
not shown here as its poor performance disrupts the scale of the plot, 
but it can be found in supplementary materials, Tables S3–S31

1 330  Page 8 of 20

Theoretical and Applied Genetics (2023) 136:30

optimized samples showed a 6% greater accuracy on average 
than random sampling. Our results also showed that the best 
accuracies were reached when the test set information was 
included in building the training set (Fig. 2). Furthermore, 
we picked the dataset-trait combination of sorghum and 
yield in Fig. 2 because it was a good example of the general 
interactions found between optimization performance and 
training set size. In general, the relative performance of the 
tested optimization methods was not consistently affected 
by the training set size, but there are two exceptions. First, 
in 3 out of the 29 dataset-trait combinations we observed a 
drop in accuracy in untargeted CDmean variants for training 
set size of 40% of the candidate set when compared with 
their performance for 20% of the candidate set. Two out of 
the 3 occurrences happened in datasets with intermediate or 
strong population structure. Secondly, PAM showed great 
performance for a training set size of 10% of the candidate 
set followed by a mediocre performance for larger training 
sets in 10 out of the 29 dataset-trait combinations, 9 of which 
corresponded to intermediate or strong population structure 
datasets.

To simplify the results and to assess the relative perfor-
mance of the different optimization methods across all train-
ing set sizes, we estimated the area under the curve (AUC) 
for all optimized training set sizes. The percentage of gain 
in AUC to random sampling for every optimization method 
in all dataset-trait-model combinations is shown in supple-
mentary materials, Tables S32–S52. We have summarized 
the AUC results in Fig. 3 and Tables 2 and 3, which are 
good overviews to explain the general trends on training set 
optimization.

Targeted versus untargeted optimization

Our results indicated that the use of the test set while build-
ing the training set resulted in better performance than untar-
geted optimization (Table 2). This table contains the aver-
age percentage of gain in AUC to random sampling across 
optimization methods for each dataset-trait combination. We 
can determine from it that, if both optimization approaches 
(targeted and untargeted) are considered simultaneously, 
performing optimization yielded on average a 4.93% greater 
AUC than random sampling. If only targeted methods are 
considered, the average gain in performance was approxi-
mately a 4-fold increase compared to untargeted (7.91% 
vs. 1.95%). The superiority of targeted vs. untargeted, was 
observed for every dataset-trait combination (Table 2).

In addition, we compared the individual methods within 
targeted and untargeted scenarios in Fig. 3 and Table 3. 
Targeted optimization methods performed better than their 
untargeted counterparts almost universally across datasets, 
traits, and models. Both targeted and untargeted methods 
usually outperformed random sampling, but targeted ones 

did it by a wider margin than untargeted ones. For instance, 
for yield in sorghum dataset and GBLUP model (Table S44), 
untargeted CDmean was a 0.85% worse than random (non-
significant difference) while targeted CDmean was a 14.08% 
better. Rscore went from a gain of 0.47% with untargeted 
optimization to 8.47% with targeted, Avg_GRM went from 
−42.01% to −15.25% and Avg_GRM_MinMax went from 
6.05% to 11.16%.

Dataset and trait role on training set optimization

The dataset had a key impact on the effectiveness of the 
training set optimization. In all datasets, optimization out-
performed random sampling, although the margin by which 
they did it varied widely (Table 2). Rice and switchgrass 
datasets showed the greatest and lowest performance when 
considering the overall average training set optimization 
performance, with values of 17.29% and 1.27%, respec-
tively (bottom row of Table 2). Sorghum showed an average 
increase of 5.42%, maize and ricePopStr presented between 
3 and 4% of increase, and soybean and spruce had around 
2%.

No pattern for the effect of the trait on the average perfor-
mance of training set optimization could be found. Optimi-
zation with respect to the trait architecture was not consistent 
across all datasets. For instance, yield showed the highest 
increase in accuracy in the rice dataset optimization, but not 
in maize, sorghum, and soybean datasets for both untargeted 
and targeted scenarios (Table 2). Our results showed that 
the average performance for each trait across datasets was 
more influenced by the datasets in which each trait belongs 
than by the genetic architecture of the trait. For example, 
Table 2 shows that the anthesis date trait was only present 
in the switchgrass dataset and had the lowest average in 
targeted optimization (2.12%). This dataset had the worst 
average performance of training set optimization (1.91%). 
Nevertheless, within switchgrass, the anthesis date showed 
an average performance of optimization over 3 times larger 
than plant height (2.12% and 0.69% respectively). However, 
because plant height was present in all datasets, it showed 
a larger average performance (7.95%) with respect to the 
anthesis date.

The  heritability  of  the  trait  (Table  1)  did  not  have  a 
consistent effect on the average optimization performance 
(Table 2). In rice and sorghum datasets the performance of 
optimization was larger for traits with lower heritability such 
as yield. However, the opposite was also true for ricePopStr 
dataset, and we did not find a clear influence of the trait 
heritability for the soybean or the spruce datasets.

The simulated trait did not show consistency in per-
formance across datasets and optimization scenarios. For 
instance,  simulated  traits  presented  on  average  higher 

1 3 
Theoretical and Applied Genetics (2023) 136:30 

Page 9 of 20  30

Table 2   Average  performance  (measured  as  the  percentage  of  gain  in  AUC  compared  to  random  sampling)  across  training  set  optimization 
methods for all dataset-trait combinations in both targeted and untargeted optimization.

Percentage of gain in AUC overview

Optimization scenario Trait

Maize Rice

Soybean Spruce Sorghum Switchgrass RicePopStr

Trait Average

Dataset

Weak PopStr

Intermediate PopStr

Strong PopStr

Untargeted

Targeted

HT
YLD
FT
R8
DBH
DE
MO
AN
ST
FP
PC
Simulated
Dataset average (non-simu-

lated traits)

HT
YLD
FT
R8
DBH
DE
MO
AN
ST
FP
PC
Simulated
Dataset average (non-simu-

lated traits)

2.88
1.40
5.12
−0.15 16.52 1.85
4.22
1.24

1.39

0.20

1.52
1.52

−0.12

2.10

−0.58

3.93
1.32

6.01
4.56
7.72

3.54
8.62

1.17
1.55

26.54 3.59
35.92 2.24
15.39

2.96

0.05
0.38

2.30
0.21

3.57

4.38
2.73

1.74

-0.82
1.59

9.17
11.53

7.02

1.07
0.91

5.60
0.62

0.69

2.12
2.93

13.16 13.40 1.62
25.95 2.93
6.10

3.65
3.56

2.70
9.24

11.48
1.91

1.86
−2.29
0.50
0.27

6.07

6.72

7.09
5.03
3.22
6.23

3.25

1.87
4.93
1.63
1.39
0.05
0.38
1.74
1.07
0.91
1.86
−2.29
2.32
1.95

7.95
13.56
9.94
2.96
4.38
2.73
7.02
2.12
2.93
7.09
5.03
7.03
7.91

4.93

Global dataset average (non-

3.71

17.29 2.24

1.88

5.42

1.27

simulated traits)

Avg_GRM  was  not  taken  into  account  for  the  calculation  of  the  average  as  its  low  performance  was  considered  an  outlier.  The  datasets  are 
grouped according to their level of population structure (PopStr) into weak population structure, intermediate population structure, and strong 
population structure. The average for each dataset across all non-simulated traits is also displayed both within targeted and untargeted optimi-
zation and globally. It is important to note that in the intersections between the dataset averages and the trait average the value displayed is the 
mean across all datasets and non-simulated traits. HT; plant height, FT; flowering time, YLD; yield, FP; florets per panicle, PC; protein content, 
MO; moisture content, R8; days to maturity, DBH; diameter at breast height, DE; density, ST; standability, AN; anthesis date.

gain than non-simulated traits for untargeted (2.32% vs. 
1.95%) but not for targeted (7.03% vs. 7.91%) optimiza-
tion (Table 2). Its effect on performance was not consist-
ent across datasets either. It showed greater performance 
than the average of the real traits in maize, spruce, and 
switchgrass and worse performance in rice, soybean and 
sorghum for both targeted and untargeted optimization. 
For  ricePopStr  dataset,  it  reached  higher  performance 
than the empirical traits for untargeted optimization and 

lower performance for targeted optimization (Table 2). It 
is important to note that, as a different simulated trait was 
generated for each cross-validation repetition, its average 
performance showed a higher standard error of the mean 
than non-simulated traits (Tables S32–S52).

Further results concerning the effect of the population 
structure of the dataset and the heritability of the trait on the 
average performance of individual optimization methods can 
be found in supplementary materials, Figures S23, S24. As a 

1 330  Page 10 of 20

Theoretical and Applied Genetics (2023) 136:30

general trend, most targeted methods were robust to changes 
in population structure and increased their performance as 
heritability decreased while the opposite happened in the 
untargeted scenario.

Prediction accuracy comparison among optimization 
methods

The qualitative overview of the performance of the training 
set optimization methods across datasets in Table 3 and the 
quantitative summary in Fig. 3 allow us to easily detect the 
trends related to the relative performance of the methods 
within both optimization scenarios:

Targeted optimization: CDmean was the criterion that 
outperformed random sampling most frequently, with a total 
value of +16 in Table 3. There were no clear differences 
between CDmean and its clustered variants, as OvClustCD-
mean had a total of +16 and WIClustCDmean had +15 in 
Table 3 and showed small and inconsistent differences in 
Fig. 3. The highest percentage of gain in AUC reached by 
any method corresponds to the targeted OvClustCDmean 
for yield in the rice dataset, reaching 49.28%. It is closely 
followed by CDmean at 47.07% and WIClustCDmean at 
43.41% (Table S35). It is important to note that OvClustCD-
mean was not consistently better than the other CDmean 

variants across dataset and traits. The next best criterion was 
Avg_GRM_MinMax, with a total score of +11 in Table 3, 
followed by Rscore, with +9. Finally, Avg_GRM was usu-
ally worse than random sampling, as indicated by its nega-
tive total value of -8 (Table 3). The relative performance of 
targeted optimization methods was very consistent across 
datasets and traits with the exception of Avg_GRM. This 
criterion, despite its usual poor performance, outperformed 
random sampling for rice dataset and was similar to it for 
maize and soybean (Table 3, Fig. 3). Its low performance 
was found specially in intermediate-strong population struc-
ture datasets (sorghum, switchgrass, ricePopStr).

Untargeted optimization: the criterion that showed the 
best  performance  in  untargeted  optimization  was  Avg_
GRM_self, with a total score in Table 3 of +12. It is fol-
lowed  by  Avg_GRM_MinMax  (+8),  CDmean  variants 
with a total value ranging between +3 and +6, PAM (+4), 
and Rscore and StratSamp with +2. Avg_GRM showed the 
worst performance against random sampling in all datasets 
(-18). The high total score of Avg_GRM_self in Table 3 
occurred  because  it  was  very  consistent  across  datasets 
and traits regardless of population structure (Fig. 3), only 
failing to outperform random sampling in the spruce data-
set, which was the worst dataset for untargeted optimiza-
tion with a total score of 0 (Table 3). CDmean reached the 

Fig. 3   Percentage gain in the area under the curve (AUC) for all opti-
mization  methods  to  random  sampling  for  each  dataset-trait  combi-
nation. The values shown correspond to the average  across genomic 
selection models and the 40 repetitions. Positive values (red) indicate 
that optimization outperformed random sampling and the opposite is 
true for negative values (blue). The optimization methods are divided 
in targeted and untargeted and the datasets are grouped according to 

their  population  structure  (PopStr)  into  weak  population  structure, 
intermediate  population  structure  and  strong  population  structure. 
HT; plant height, FT; flowering time, YLD; yield, FP; florets per pan-
icle, PC; protein content, MO; moisture content, R8; days to maturity, 
DBH;  diameter  at  breast  height,  DE;  density,  ST;  standability,  AN; 
anthesis date

1 3 
Theoretical and Applied Genetics (2023) 136:30 

Page 11 of 20  30

Table 3   Qualitative overview of the performance of the training set optimization methods across datasets

Qualitative overview of the algorithm performance

Optimization scenario

Optimization algorithm Dataset

Untargeted optimization

Targeted optimization

Weak PopStr

Intermediate PopStr

Strong PopStr

Maize Rice

Soybean

Spruce

Sorghum Switchgrass RicePopStr

Total

StratSamp
CDmean
OvClustCDmean
WICIustCDmean
Rscore
Avg_GRM
Avg_GRM_MinMax
Avg_GRM_self
PAM
Untargeted Total
CDmean
OvClustCDmean
WICIustCDmean
Rscore
Avg_GRM
Avg_GRM_MinMax
Targeted Total
Global Total

ns
+
ns
ns
ns
–
+
++
+
+2
+++
++
++
+
ns
++
+10
+12

+
ns
+
++
+
++
+
++
+
ns
–
–
+
+
++
++
+
+
+8
+8
++
+++
+++ +++
++
+++
+++ +
ns
++
+
++
+11
+14
+19
+22

ns
+
ns
+
+
–
ns
ns
ns
0
++
++
++
ns
–
+
+5
+5

+
ns
ns
ns
ns
–
++
++
+
+3
++
++
++
++
–
++
+8
+11

ns
+
+
+
ns
–
+
+
+-
+2
+
+
+
+
–
++
+3
+5

ns
+-
–
+
+-
–
++
+++
+-
+2
+++
+++
+++
+
–
+
+8
+10

+2
+6
+3
+6
+2
−18
+8
+12
+4
+25
+16
+16
+15
+9
−8
+11
+59
+84

A sign “ + ” indicates that the optimization led to a significantly larger area under the curve (AUC) than random sampling. If the optimized train-
ing set performed worse than a randomly sampled one we used “−”. If no significant differences were found, “ns” is displayed. A single sign in a 
cell indicates that the difference occurred in at least one trait for at least one model. Two signs mean that the difference happened in all non-sim-
ulated traits for at least one model. Three signs mean that the difference happens in all traits for at least one model. The “ +− ” sign means that the 
optimization was significantly better than random for some traits and worse for other traits. The sum of each row is shown in the last column. We 
assigned a value of 1 to each “ + ” and −1 to each “−”. We calculated the sum of each column similarly within untargeted optimization (Untar-
geted Total), within targeted optimization (Targeted Total), and globally (Global Total).

highest performance obtained by an untargeted method in 
any dataset-trait combination for yield in the rice dataset 
(27.59% vs 18.88% for Avg_GRM_self, see Table S35), but 
it was inconsistent across datasets and traits, being similar 
or worse than Avg_GRM_self in almost all circumstances 
outside the rice dataset (Fig. 3). It also presented a poor 
performance when population structure was intermediate or 
strong (Table 3).

Optimization selection strategy and computational 
time

In this section, we explore the existing trade-off in training 
set optimization between maximizing the relationship train-
ing set–test set and minimizing the relationship of individu-
als within the training set (Fig. 4). In this sense, we assumed 
that training set optimization can be considered a Pareto 
optimization with an unknown Pareto front (for more details, 
see Pszczola et al. (2012); Isidro y Sánchez and Akdemir 
(2021)). The Pareto front contains a series of nondominated 

solutions (i.e., solutions in which it is impossible to improve 
one of the criteria without deteriorating the other) and all 
possible  combinations  of  individuals  in  the  training  set 
would have to be tested to find them with certainty, which 
is not viable. Despite the absence of the Pareto front, Fig. 4 
allows us to explore the relative position of the training sets 
obtained by the different optimization methods in the afore-
mentioned trade-off. Targeted optimization always showed 
a higher relationship training set–test set than untargeted 
and  presented  a  similar  relationship  within  the  training 
set. Among the targeted methods, the highest relationship 
training set–test set was achieved by Avg_GRM, followed 
by CDmean and Avg_GRM_MinMax, WIClustCDmean, 
OvClustCDmean,  and  Rscore.  Avg_GRM_MinMax  had 
the most diverse training set, followed by WIClustCDmean, 
OvClustCDmean, Rscore, CDmean, and Avg_GRM. In the 
untargeted scenario, Avg_GRM_self presented the highest 
relationship training set–test set and the smallest relation-
ship within the training set. Avg_GRM_MinMax was very 
close  to  Avg_GRM_self  and  Avg_GRM  had  the  lowest 

1 330  Page 12 of 20

Theoretical and Applied Genetics (2023) 136:30

relationship training set–test set and the highest relation-
ship within the training set. The other methods presented a 
similar level of relationship training set–test set and varying 
degrees of relationship within the training set. Among them, 
WIClustCDmean and OvClustCDmean had the most var-
ied training sets, followed by stratified sampling, CDmean, 
random sampling, PAM, and Rscore. It is important to note 
that in both optimization scenarios (targeted and untargeted), 
Avg_GRM showed an extremely high relationship within the 
training set and, as a result, it is far from the other optimiza-
tion methods in Fig. 4.

More details about how each optimization method sam-
ples individuals from the genetic space to include them in 
the training set can be found in supplementary materials, 
Figures S2–S22. As a general trend, it can be observed 
that, in the untargeted scenario, CDmean and Rscore to a 
lesser extent sampled many individuals from the edge of 
the genetic space for small training set sizes and focused 
on the center when the training set size was equal to or 
larger than 40% of the candidate set. On the contrary, in 
the targeted scenario, both methods made an even sam-
pling of the genetic space regardless of the training set 

size. PAM tended to sample with high-frequency isolated 
individuals and Avg_GRM only focused on a small part 
of the genetic space, while the other optimization meth-
ods made an even sampling of the genetic space for both 
optimization scenarios.

The computational time for the different methods was 
analyzed and the results are shown in Figure S53. The 
slowest ones were Rscore and CDmean, with all variants 
of  Avg_GRM  and  PAM  being  one  and  three  orders  of 
magnitude faster respectively for small datasets. The time 
needed for CDmean, Rscore, and PAM escalated in a cubic 
way with the dimensions of the dataset while Avg_GRM 
variants escalated in a quadratic way (Figure S53). Finally, 
stratified sampling would be close to instant for any data-
set size.

Optimization of the training set size

Figure 5 shows the validation of the optimal training set 
sizes selected by the different evaluation criteria by inter-
polating  the  GBLUP  accuracies  obtained  in  the  cross-
validation.  The  interpolation  was  performed  over  the 

Fig. 4   Relative position of the training sets obtained by the different 
optimization methods when comparing the trade-off in the maximiza-
tion of the average relationship between the training set and the test 
set  and  the  minimization  of  the  relationship  within  the  training  set 
(maximization  of  the  negative)  for  all  optimization  methods.  Zoom 
has  been  made  on  the  group  of  methods  on  the  right  of  the  plot  to 
better  appreciate  their  relative  positions.  The  addition  of  “targ”  at 
the end of the name of a method indicates that targeted optimization 

was performed. Otherwise, it corresponds to the untargeted scenario. 
For each method, the average across the 40 repetitions in all dataset-
trait  combinations  is  shown.  The  average  values  within  each  data-
set  were  scaled  and  centered  before  combining  them  and  they  were 
scaled again between 0 and 1 afterward. Targeted optimization always 
showed a higher relationship training set–test set than untargeted and 
presented a comparable relationship within the training set

1 3 
Theoretical and Applied Genetics (2023) 136:30 

Page 13 of 20  30

accuracies corresponding to the best method of optimiza-
tion of the training set composition in each dataset (CDmean 
for targeted scenario and Rice and Spruce in untargeted; 
Avg_GRM_self in the rest). Our results showed that a larger 
reduction in the training set size is observed when using tar-
geted vs. untargeted optimization without causing a substan-
tial drop in accuracy (Fig. 5A). In most dataset-trait combi-
nations, the training set size of 50–55% selected by targeted 
Avg_GRM_MinMax resulted in a small accuracy loss of less 
than 5%, with only one outlier reaching 10% (Fig. 5B). In 
the untargeted scenario training set sizes ranging between 
65 and 85% are needed for similar drops in accuracies. All 
optimization criteria that rely on a target accuracy tended 
to select training set sizes larger than needed to reach the 
selected target accuracy of 95 or 99% of the maximum, 
with Avg_GRM_self selecting the smallest training sets 

and being the closest to the target, followed by Rscore and 
CDmean. For instance, (Fig. 5A) shows that the training 
set sizes selected by Avg_GRM_self for a target accuracy 
of 99% are similar to the ones obtained with CDmean for a 
target accuracy of 95%. However, the 3 criteria presented a 
large variation and for some dataset-trait combinations, the 
obtained accuracy was lower than the target. For example, 
when target accuracy was 95%, the actual accuracies result-
ing from the training set sizes selected by Avg_GRM_self 
ranged between 82% and 99%, with 68% of the dataset-trait 
combinations reaching an accuracy larger than the target 
accuracy of 95% (Fig. 5 B). In general, a larger variance 
was observed for evaluation metrics with a lower bias in the 
estimation of the target accuracy, with the variance being 
larger for smaller values of target accuracy.

Fig. 5   Boxplots showing (A) the optimal training set sizes selected by 
the different evaluation criteria in the tested datasets (all except soy-
bean) and (B) the accuracy loss that would result from using the opti-
mal training set size with GBLUP model in the assessed dataset-trait 
combinations (all non-simulated traits in all datasets except soybean). 
The training set size is expressed as a percentage of the candidate set 
and the accuracy is expressed as a percentage of the maximum accu-
racy  obtained  when  the  training  set  is  the  entire  candidate  set.  The 
boxplots on the left correspond to targeted optimization and the ones 
on  the  right  correspond  to  untargeted.  The  evaluation  criteria  were 
tested in 3 different scenarios: Optimal (Opt) which is only possible 

in  Avg_GRM_MinMax  as  it  is  the  only  evaluation  criteria  that  pre-
sents a maximum within the range of training set sizes tested; target 
accuracy (TA) = 95% and target accuracy = 99%, which correspond 
to the training set sizes that result in the evaluation metric being 95% 
and 99% of the value it reaches when the training set is the entire can-
didate set respectively. The dotted lines in (B) correspond to the tar-
get accuracy. The displayed accuracies are average values across iter-
ations and are calculated by interpolation from the accuracy obtained 
in the tested training set sizes with the best training set optimization 
algorithm  for  each  dataset  (CDmean  for  targeted  scenario  and  Rice 
and Spruce in untargeted; Avg_GRM_self in the rest)

1 330  Page 14 of 20

Discussion

The goal of our work was to develop guidelines and estab-
lish a benchmark of a wide range of training set optimiza-
tion methods under different population structures, genetic 
architectures, and heritability values. According to the lit-
erature, an ideal training set optimization method should (i) 
be able to build a training set that maximizes the accuracy 
of the GS model, by maximizing the relationship between 
the training set and the test set, and by minimizing the rela-
tionship within the training set to capture as much genetic 
variance as possible. (Pszczola et al. 2012; Isidro y Sánchez 
and Akdemir 2021), (ii) reduce the computational burden 
and iii) be easy to implement. For instance, CDmean should 
be preferable over clustered CDmean if both of them per-
form equally. Our results, in concordance with many papers 
describing training set optimization (see Isidro y Sánchez 
and Akdemir (2021) review), showed that the building of 
the training set has a very significant impact to increase the 
accuracy of GS models relative to random sampling (Fig. 3).

Optimization of the composition of the training set: 
untargeted scenario

Previous reports (Pszczola et al. 2012; Clark et al. 2012) 
showed that to optimally design a training set, we should 
minimize the relationship within the training set but maxi-
mize the relationship between training set and test set. The 
latter is not possible in the untargeted scenario as the test 
set  is  unknown.  The  algorithm  Avg_GRM_self,  which 
focused on minimizing the relationship within the training 
set, outperformed all the untargeted methods tested in most 
situations, including the previously suggested algorithm 
Avg_GRM (Fig. 3, Table 3). This indicates that maximizing 
the genetic variance in the training set seems to play a more 
important role than maximizing the relationship between the 
training set and the target population. As in untargeted opti-
mization the target population is not the test set, Avg_GRM 
unsurprisingly yielded very poor results, generating a train-
ing set with low diversity and low relationship with the test 
set (Fig. 4), which lead to a poor sampling of the genetic 
space (Figures S2–S22), and consequently performed sig-
nificantly worse than random sampling (Fig. 3, Table 3).

To  balance  both  Avg_GRM_self  and  Avg_GRM 
approaches, we developed the Avg_GRM_MinMax crite-
rion. This algorithm performed well but it never exceeded 
Avg_GRM_self in non-simulated traits. Our results strongly 
suggest that optimization that does not take into account the 
target population, such as Avg_GRM_self, is the best strat-
egy under untargeted optimization scenarios. For instance, 
Avg_GRM_self  usually  outperformed  CDmean  for  all 
datasets-traits combinations except for rice and spruce and 

Theoretical and Applied Genetics (2023) 136:30

it was more robust than CDmean to population structure 
(Fig. 3, Table 3). Figure 4 also supports the superiority of 
Avg_GRM_self, as it generates training sets that are more 
diverse and with a higher relationship with the test set than 
the other untargeted methods. The reason for the high rela-
tionship training set–test set achieved by Avg_GRM_self is 
probably due to the random selection of the test sets, which 
leads on average to an even coverage of the genetic space 
and, therefore, the highly diverse training sets selected by 
Avg_GRM_self are strongly related to them.

Our  results  also  indicated  that  other  methods  (PAM, 
Rscore, and Stratified sampling) did not consistently out-
perform random sampling (Fig. 3, Table 3). In the literature, 
there have been contrasting results in this matter. For exam-
ple, Guo et al. (2019) showed that PAM was usually better 
than targeted PEVmean and CDmean, while the opposite 
was observed in Rio et al. (2021b) and Isidro y Sánchez 
and Akdemir (2021). Our results are in line with the latter 
studies, as PAM was consistently outperformed by targeted 
CDmean and sometimes it was worse than random sampling 
(Fig. 3, Table 3). We claim that the contrasting search heu-
ristic settings applied in both studies might be the reason for 
the different results. Guo et al. (2019) used 100 or 200 itera-
tions of a genetic algorithm (depending on the dataset size) 
to implement CDmean, while we performed 200 iterations 
of a genetic algorithm and 2000 steps of simulated annealing 
(10 steps for each iteration of the genetic algorithm). Ou and 
Liao (2019) suggested that Rscore was a great alternative 
to previous criteria, but they only tested it in the targeted 
scenario and our results show that it is among the weakest 
methods in the untargeted scenario (Fig. 3, Table 3).

The trends explained above were mostly constant across 
the entire range of training set sizes, but as seen in Fig. 2, 
there are some exceptions that can be explained using Fig-
ures S2–S22. CDmean sometimes showed a drop in perfor-
mance for a training set size of 40% of the candidate set, 
which coincides with the observed transition from sampling 
frequently from the edge of the genetic space to focusing 
on the center (see Supplementary Materials, Note 2). PAM 
usually showed great performance for the smallest training 
set size but fell off rapidly in datasets with intermediate or 
strong population structures. This is likely because, for inter-
mediate or large training sets, this method tends to overrep-
resent isolated individuals, which are very common when 
population structure is strong, as clearly seen in Figure S18.

Optimization of the composition of the training set: 
targeted scenario

As has been shown previously (Akdemir and Isidro-Sánchez 
2019), targeted performed substantially better than untar-
geted optimization, as it allows to maximize the relationship 

1 3 
Theoretical and Applied Genetics (2023) 136:30 

Page 15 of 20  30

training set–test set, which was not possible in the untar-
geted scenario (Fig. 4). Among optimization methods, those 
that use CDmean statistics showed the best results under 
targeted optimization, which is consistent with previous 
studies (Akdemir and Isidro-Sánchez 2019; Ou and Liao 
2019). Atanda et al. (2021) indicated that the performance 
of Avg_GRM and CDmean was similar, although in our 
study (Fig. 3, Tables S32–S52), Avg_GRM consistently 
had the lowest performance. This criterion is based on find-
ing the training set with the highest relationship with the 
test set, at cost of minimizing the diversity (Fig. 4). This 
trade-off (Pszczola et al. 2012) and the poor performance of 
Avg_GRM confirm that maximizing one at the expense of 
the other it is not a good strategy. We proposed Avg_GRM_
MinMax to improve Avg_GRM by balancing both aspects 
of the trade-off (Fig. 4). This allowed Avg_GRM_MinMax 
to outperform Avg_GRM in all situations, being the best 
targeted method after CDmean and its clustered variants 
(Fig. 3, Table 3).

In  our  study,  Rscore  consistently  performed  worse 
than CDmean, which seemed to contrast with the results 
obtained by Ou and Liao (2019). However, Ou and Liao 
(2019) compared targeted Rscore with untargeted CDmean, 
which explains the difference between both studies. CDmean 
and Rscore are based on similar but not identical concepts, 
which may explain the observed difference in performance. 
CDmean is an estimation of the correlation between the 
GEBVs and the true breeding values (TBVs) (Laloë 1993), 
while Rscore is derived from the correlation between the 
GEBVs and the unknown phenotypes (Ou and Liao 2019). 
The phenotypic correlation is regularly used to calculate the 
accuracy of the GS models because the TBVs are unknown. 
Nevertheless, in training set optimization both the TBVs 
and the phenotypes are unknown and therefore there is no 
advantage in using the phenotypes over the TBVs. In this 
sense, the higher the heritability is, the lower the differences 
between the TBVs and the phenotypes. Therefore, we would 
expect Rscore and CDmean to be increasingly similar as her-
itability gets closer to 1. Figure S24 supports this claim, as 
heritability is positively correlated with Rscore performance 
but not with CDmean performance. Nevertheless, even for 
the trait with the highest heritability (HT in ricePopStr, 
h2 = 0.81 ), CDmean outperformed Rscore in both targeted 
and untargeted scenarios (Fig. 3, Tables S50–S52), con-
firming that training set optimization on the correlation of 
GEBVs and TBVs is key for great performance. This claim 
is further supported by the results of Tsai et al. (2021), who 
found that Bayesian optimization based on predicted geno-
typic values (an estimator of the TBVs) performed better 
than a similar optimization based on predicted phenotypic 
values.

It is important to note that results from this study apply 
to the framework where training and test sets belong to the 

same population. Additional challenges that could not be 
addressed in this study may be present when the training 
and test sets are different populations. A common scenario 
would be using older training sets to predict a test set from 
a newer year, which would involve dealing with the year 
effect. For instance, Lemeunier et al. (2022) obtained dif-
ferent results from ours, with very good performance with 
Avg_GRM and similar methods. This is probably because 
their test set genetic space was smaller and contained within 
the genetic space of the candidate set. In this situation, for an 
appropriate training set size, Avg_GRM will select all lines 
within the candidate set that are in the overlapping part of 
the genetic space with the test set, but not lines with a low 
relationship with the test set, and therefore they obtained a 
higher performance using Avg_GRM. The role of the differ-
ent training algorithms under different populations will be 
addressed in a future work

Regarding  computational  time,  the  best  performing 
method (CDmean) was also one of the most computation-
ally intensive (Table S53). In fact, in this work, we needed 
to perform a preselection in the soybean dataset due to the 
large sample size, as otherwise we would not have been 
able to perform the 40 repetitions in a reasonable time. It 
is important to note that in a breeding program the opti-
mization process only needs to be run once, and therefore, 
the use of CDmean will not be as limited for large data-
sets. Nevertheless, if computational time is a major con-
cern, Avg_GRM_MinMax would be the best alternative to 
CDmean, since although it did not reach the same level of 
performance as CDmean, it still achieved excellent results 
while being computationally faster.

Training set size optimization

With the implementation of genomic-assisted breeding tools 
into the breeding programs, the evaluation of the germplasm 
has significantly changed. Breeders do not need to evalu-
ate the entire progeny in the field but to optimally select a 
training set size that will improve the resource allocation 
within the breeding program. For instance, a reduction in 
training set size due to optimization implies that more alleles 
could be tested in the field or that more resources could 
be invested in more precise phenotyping. Consequently, it 
is important to optimize the training set size to minimize 
it without incurring a large loss of accuracy. However, the 
training set size optimization is computationally intensive as 
it relies on performing optimization repeatedly for several 
training set sizes and fitting a function that can predict the 
evolution of the evaluation criteria as the training set size 
varies (Figures S25–S30). Our results showed that Avg_
GRM_MinMax was the most suitable criterion for the opti-
mization of the training set size in the targeted scenario. This 
was because it was the only criterion that showed a relative 

1 330  Page 16 of 20

Theoretical and Applied Genetics (2023) 136:30

maximum, which allowed us to accurately predict a small 
training set size with low accuracy loss (Fig. 5). In contrast, 
CDmean and Rscore did not present a maximum within the 
range of tested training set sizes, but they could be used to 
select an optimal size that would result in an expected accu-
racy loss (Fig. 5), which would be a good approach if they 
were good predictors of the accuracy. However, for a given 
target accuracy, CDmean tended to select larger training sets 
than needed, causing the real accuracies to be greater than 
the target and therefore being a biased predictor. Rscore had 
a lower bias than CDmean, but it showed a large variance. 
For instance, when the target accuracy was 95%, the real 
accuracies corresponding to the training set sizes selected 
by Rscore across dataset-trait combinations ranged between 
85% and 100%. In addition, optimization with CDmean and 
Rscore was substantially more time-consuming than the 
optimization of Avg_GRM_MinMax, making the latter the 
best option for training set size optimization in the targeted 
scenario.

With regard to the untargeted scenario, none of the crite-
ria presented a maximum within the range of tested training 
set sizes and therefore relied on a predefined target accu-
racy (Fig. 5). Our results showed that none of the criteria 
were reliable predictors of accuracy, as they presented high 
bias (CDmean), high variance (Avg_GRM_self) or a com-
bination of the two (Rscore). Furthermore, in Fig. 5 it can 
be seen that Avg_GRM_self with a target accuracy of 99% 
yielded very similar results to CDmean with a target accu-
racy of 95%, suggesting that the three criteria would be simi-
lar with a proper tuning of the target accuracy parameter. 
As a result, we recommend using Avg_GRM_self, as it is 
markedly faster than the other criteria. However, as the large 
variance Avg_GRM_self for a target accuracy of 95% may 
result in outliers with an unacceptably low accuracy, a target 
accuracy larger than 95% is advised.

It has been shown previously that the larger the training 
set, the higher the prediction accuracies due to a reduction 
of bias and variance of marker effect estimates (Clark et al. 
2012; Rincent et al. 2012; Isidro et al. 2015; Rincent et al. 
2017; Guo et al. 2019; Akdemir and Isidro-Sánchez 2019). 
As seen in Fig. 5, for targeted optimization a training set 
size of around 50-55% of the candidate set usually generates 
accuracies in the range of 95-100% of the maximum, while 
for untargeted optimization a training set size of 65-85% is 
needed for similar results. The ability to consider the rela-
tionship between the training set and the test set in targeted 
optimization allows the reduction in training set size, while 
for untargeted optimization we must increase the sample 
size if we want to obtain a high likelihood of including in 
the training set all the lines relevant for making predictions 
over the test set. This shows that identifying and excluding 

irrelevant genotypes allows to reduce the training set size, 
but including them in the training set does not have a nega-
tive impact on prediction accuracy, as demonstrated by the 
fact that the largest accuracy was almost universally reached 
when the training set was the entire candidate set (Tables 
S3–S31). In this sense, our study does not follow the results 
of Lorenz and Smith (2015), who indicated that excluding 
distinct genotypes improved prediction. This discrepancy 
might be explained by the fact that the marker density of 
Lorenz and Smith (2015) was much lower than the one used 
in our study, with a high marker density being essential to 
decrease the likelihood of including individuals in the train-
ing set whose marker-QTL linkage disequilibrium phases are 
markedly different to the ones found in the test set (Hickey 
et al. 2014).

Lastly, we have calculated the correlation between the 
evaluation metric and accuracy across training set sizes (Fig-
ures S31–S36) and found that a higher correlation doesn’t 
necessarily imply a better ability of the evaluation metric 
to identify the best training set size. This is exemplified 
by targeted Avg_GRM_MinMax. This evaluation metric 
reached a maximum value for an intermediate training set 
size and then decreased for all datasets (Figures S25–S30), 
which caused it to be weakly correlated with the evolution 
of the actual accuracy of the genomic selection models. 
Nevertheless, we found that the training set size for which 
Avg_GRM_MinMax reached its maximum was a very good 
predictor of the actual optimal size (Fig. 5).

Population structure, heritability and trait 
architecture

As would have been expected from previous studies (Isidro 
et al. 2015; Rincent et al. 2017; Ou and Liao 2019), popu-
lation structure had a major impact on the performance of 
optimization methods (Table 3), although in this study it 
did not have the same degree of importance. Our results 
suggest that methods that generated a very diverse train-
ing set (Fig. 4) were usually very robust to variations in 
population structure (Figs. 3, S23). For instance, the meth-
ods most negatively affected by population structure were 
Avg_GRM and PAM (Figure S23), with the former selecting 
training sets with extremely low diversity (Fig. 4) and the 
latter over-representing individuals that are isolated in the 
genetic space, which are very common under high popula-
tion structure (Figures S2–S22). Our results also show that 
including clustering information could improve the perfor-
mance of an optimization method when population structure 
is high, although not by a large margin. In Figure S23 a weak 
positive correlation was observed between population struc-
ture and the performance of both Stratified sampling and 

1 3 
Theoretical and Applied Genetics (2023) 136:30 

Page 17 of 20  30

untargeted WIClustCDmean, which is consistent with previ-
ous results (Isidro et al. 2015; Rincent et al. 2017; Ou and 
Liao 2019). However, under the targeted scenario, the inclu-
sion of clustering information did not have any effect on the 
performance of CDmean, as the performance of all targeted 
CDmean variants was mostly uncorrelated with population 
structure (Figure S23). This difference between targeted 
vs. untargeted can be explained in Fig. 4. Adding cluster 
information to optimize the training set implies an increase 
of genetic diversity in the training set, which improved the 
performance of methods that count on population structure. 
Nevertheless, in the targeted scenario, this advantage is 
obtained at the expense of reducing its relationship with the 
test set, which offsets any gains that may have been obtained. 
Furthermore,  Avg_GRM_self  had  a  significantly  better 
performance than any clustered methods in most situations 
regardless of population structure in the untargeted scenario 
(Fig. 3), which indicates that adding cluster information is 
not key for training set optimization, bypassing the problem 
of finding a clustering suitable for training set optimization. 
This is not a trivial issue, as evidenced by the fact that dif-
ferent training set optimization results were obtained with 
similar methods under the same datasets in studies that had 
used different clustering approaches (Isidro et al. 2015; Ou 
and Liao 2019). In addition, the superior performance of 
Avg_GRM_self suggests that making a diverse training set 
would be enough to make it robust to population structure, 
as no clusters are overrepresented or underrepresented in the 
training set (Figure S2–S22).

Trait architecture and heritability are important factors 
affecting the performance of training set optimization, which 
is consistent with the literature (Rincent et al. 2012; Isidro 
et al. 2015; Karaman et al. 2016; Olatoye et al. 2020; Hes-
lot and Feoktistov 2020) and is evidenced in our results by 
the different average performance within a dataset for the 
different traits (Table 2). However, how they influence opti-
mization is difficult to assess, as the effect of the trait was 
inconsistent across datasets, and trait architecture is diffi-
cult to quantify. It is important to note that the optimiza-
tion performance in the simulated traits broadly followed 
the same patterns as in non-simulated traits, although in a 
much less consistent way (Tables S32–S52). This lack of 
consistency stems from the high standard error of the mean 
caused by the fact that a different trait was simulated for each 
iteration. Regarding the impact of heritability on the perfor-
mance of the different methods (Figure S23), they tended 
to be positively correlated in the untargeted scenario while 
the opposite happened for targeted methods. These results 
suggest that high heritability traits enable to make a more 
non-specific diverse training set, while in low heritability 
traits the specific design of the training set for the desired 
test set had a key impact.

Conclusions and final guidelines for training set 
optimization

In this work, we have been able to identify the most promis-
ing strategies for optimizing the training set size and com-
position and have obtained new insights into the factors 
that influence the optimization process. Our results suggest 
that, when heritability is low, the advantage of targeted over 
untargeted optimization increases (Figure S24), and that 
selecting a diverse training set is a good strategy to deal 
with structured populations, as evidenced by the good per-
formance of Avg_GRM_self when population structure was 
high. Furthermore, the varying performance of the optimiza-
tion methods for the different traits within a given dataset 
(Table 2) shows that there is an impact of trait architecture 
on training set optimization, although we were not able to 
identify the underlying mechanisms. Finally, we found that 
the GS model used did not have a noticeable effect on the 
performance of training set optimization. For modeling, we 
recommend testing at least one linear and one nonlinear 
model for each dataset.

The main benchmark guidelines from this study are:

–  The choice of a GS model did not have an impact on 
prediction accuracies when compared to the variation 
in prediction accuracies caused by the different training 
populations.

–  The relationship between individuals within the training 
set seems to play a more important role than the rela-
tionship between the training set and the test set on the 
optimization, i.e, minimizing the relationship between 
individuals in the training set was more reliable than 
maximizing the relationship between the training set and 
the test set, although ideally a balance of the two should 
be reached.

–  Optimization of training set size:

–  The optimal training set size depends on the breeding 
resources budget, but a training set size that covers 
50-55% of the total candidate population in the tar-
geted scenario and 65-85% in untargeted will result 
in an accuracy loss of less than 5% in almost all situ-
ations.

–  If a more exact estimation of the optimal training set 
size is desired, we recommend using Avg_GRM_
MinMax for targeted optimization and Avg_GRM_
self for untargeted. For the latter, it is needed to set a 
target accuracy, and we recommend selecting more 
than 95%.

1 330  Page 18 of 20

Theoretical and Applied Genetics (2023) 136:30

–  Optimization of training set composition:

–  Avg_GRM_self is the recommended optimization 
method in the untargeted scenario as it consistently 
showed excellent performance (Fig. 3, Table 3), and it 
is computationally fast (Table S53) and escalates well 
for datasets with high dimensionality.

–  An ideal untargeted optimization method should be 
able to use the genomic information without the need 
to specify a target population. This is shown by the 
superior  performance  of  Avg_GRM_self  (Fig.  3), 
which is the only method that complies with these 
requirements.

–  If test set data is available, targeted optimization is 
advised. Within the targeted scenario, CDmean is the 
most powerful method under all circumstances (Fig. 3, 
Table 3).

–  The  addition  of  clustering  information  to  tar-
geted CDmean to account for population structure 
(WIClustCDmean and OvClustCDmean) does not 
improve its performance.

–  The most important weakness of targeted CDmean is 
its low speed for large datasets (Table S53). If time is 
a limiting factor, Avg_GRM_MinMax can be used as 
an alternative to CDmean, as its time requirement is 
substantially lower at the expense of a moderate drop 
in performance.

–  In summary, CDmean and Avg_GRM_self are the 
chosen methods for training set optimization under 
most circumstances.

Supplementary Information  The online version contains supplemen-
tary material available at https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s00122- 023- 04265-6.

Author contribution statement  JIS  conceived  the  study.  JFG  per-
formed statistical analyses. JFG, JIS, and DA drafted the manuscript. 
All authors discussed the results and reviewed the manuscript.

Funding Information  Open Access funding provided thanks to the 
CRUE-CSIC agreement with Springer Nature. JIS and JFG were sup-
ported by the Beatriz Galindo Program (BEAGAL18/00115) from 
the Ministerio de Educación y Formación Profesional of Spain and 
the Severo Ochoa Program for Centres of Excellence in R &D from 
the Agencia Estatal de Investigación of Spain, Grant SEV-2016-0672 
(2017-2021) to the CBGP.

Data Availability  The datasets analyzed during the current study are 
available in GitHub, https:// github. com/ TheRo cinan te- lab/ Publi catio ns/ 
tree/ main/ 2022/ Ferna ndez- Gonza lez_ et_ al_ 2022_ Compa rison.

Declarations 

Conflict of interest  The authors declare that they have no conflict of 
interest.

Open Access  This  article  is  licensed  under  a  Creative  Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, 

adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, 
as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the 
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate 
if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless 
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not 
included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended 
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted 
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright 
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. 
org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.

References

Akdemir D (2017) STPGA: selection of training populations with a 

genetic algorithm. bioRxiv

Akdemir  D,  Isidro-Sánchez  J  (2019)  Design  of  training  popula-
tions for selective phenotyping in genomic prediction. Sci Rep 
9(1):1446

Akdemir D, Rio S, Sánchez IY et al (2021) TrainSel: an R package 
for selection of training populations. Front Genet 12:607
Akdemir D, Sanchez JI, Jannink J-L (2015) Optimization of genomic 
selection training populations with a genetic algorithm. Genet 
Sel Evol 47(1):38

Atanda SA, Olsen M, Burgueño J, Crossa J, Dzidzienyo D, Beyene 
Y, Gowda M, Dreher K, Zhang X, Prasanna BM et al (2021) 
Maximizing efficiency of genomic selection in Cimmyt’s tropi-
cal maize breeding program. Theor Appl Genet 134(1):279–294
Beaulieu J, Doerksen TK, MacKay J, Rainville A, Bousquet J (2014) 
Genomic  selection  accuracies  within  and  between  environ-
ments and small breeding groups in white spruce. BMC Genom 
15(1):1–16

Ben-Sadoun S, Rincent R, Auzanneau J, Oury F-X, Rolland B, Heu-
mez E, Ravel C, Charmet G, Bouchet S (2020) Economical 
optimization of a breeding scheme by selective phenotyping of 
the calibration set in a multi-trait context: application to bread 
making quality. Theor Appl Genet 133(7):2197–2212

Bustos-Korts D, Malosetti M, Chapman S, Biddulph B, van Eeu-
wijk F (2016) Improvement of predictive ability by uniform 
coverage of the target genetic space. G3 Genes Genomes Genet 
6(11):3733–3747

Clark SA, Hickey JM, Daetwyler HD, van der Werf JH (2012) The 
importance of information on relatives for the prediction of 
genomic breeding values and the implications for the makeup 
of reference data sets in livestock breeding schemes. Genet Sel 
Evol 44(1):4

Crossa J, Pérez-Rodríguez P, Cuevas J, Montesinos-López O, Jar-
quín D, de los Campos G, Burgueño J, González-Camacho JM, 
Pérez-Elizalde S, Beyene Y, et al (2017) Genomic selection in 
plant breeding: methods, models, and perspectives. Trends Plant 
Sci 22(11):961–975

de los Campos G, Gianola D and Rosa G (2009) Reproducing Ker-
nel Hilbert spaces regression: a general framework for genetic 
evaluation. J Anim Sci 87(6):1883–1887

de Mendiburu F, Yaseen M (2020) Agricolae: statistical procedures 

for agricultural research. R package version 1.4.0

Endelman JB (2011) Ridge regression and other kernels for genomic 
selection with r package rrBLUP. Plant Genome 4(3):250–255
Evans J, Sanciangco MD, Lau KH, Crisovan E, Barry K, Daum C, 
Hundley H, Jenkins J, Kennedy M, Kunde-Ramamoorthy G, 
Vaillancourt B, Acharya A, Schmutz J, Saha M, Kaeppler SM, 
Brummer EC, Casler MD, Buell CR (2018) Extensive genetic 
diversity is present within north American switchgrass germ-
plasm. Plant Genome 11(1):170055

1 3 
Theoretical and Applied Genetics (2023) 136:30 

Page 19 of 20  30

Fernandes SB, Dias KO, Ferreira DF, Brown PJ (2018) Efficiency 
of  multi-trait,  indirect,  and  trait-assisted  genomic  selection 
for  improvement  of  biomass  sorghum.  Theor  Appl  Genet 
131(3):747–755

Fernández  González  J  (2021)  Training  optimization  in  genomic 
selection: A comparison of algorithms. Master’s thesis, E.T.S. 
de Ingeniería Agronómica, Alimentaria y de Biosistemas (UPM)
Gianola D, van Kaam JBCHM (2008) Reproducing Kernel Hilbert 
spaces regression methods for genomic assisted prediction of 
quantitative traits. Genetics 178(4):2289–2303

Guo T, Yu X, Li X, Zhang H, Zhu C, Flint-Garcia S, McMullen MD, 
Holland JB, Szalma SJ, Wisser RJ, Yu J (2019) Optimal designs 
for genomic selection in hybrid crops. Mol Plant 12(3):390–401
Guo Z, Tucker DM, Basten CJ, Gandhi H, Ersoz E, Guo B, Xu Z, 
Wang D, Gay G (2014) The impact of population structure on 
genomic prediction in stratified populations. Theor Appl Genet 
127(3):749–762

Hansey  CN,  Johnson  JM,  Sekhon  RS,  Kaeppler  SM,  de  Leon  N 
(2011) Genetic diversity of a maize association population with 
restricted phenology. Crop Sci 51(2):704–715

Heslot N, Feoktistov V (2020) Optimization of selective phenotyp-
ing and population design for genomic prediction. J Agric Biol 
Environ Stat 25(4):579–600

Hickey JM, Dreisigacker S, Crossa J, Hearne S, Babu R, Prasanna 
BM, Grondona M, Zambelli A, Windhausen VS, Mathews K 
et al (2014) Evaluation of genomic selection training population 
designs and genotyping strategies in plant breeding programs 
using simulation. Crop Sci 54(4):1476–1488

Hirsch CN, Foerster JM, Johnson JM, Sekhon RS, Muttoni G, Vail-
lancourt B, Peñagaricano F, Lindquist E, Pedraza MA, Barry 
K, de Leon N, Kaeppler SM, Buell CR (2014) Insights into 
the  maize  pan-genome  and  pan-transcriptome.  Plant  Cell 
26(1):121–135

Isidro J, Akdemir D, Burke J (2011) Genomic selection in wheat, pp. 

1001–1016. Lavoisier

Isidro J, Jannink J-L, Akdemir D, Poland J, Heslot N, Sorrells ME 
(2015) Training set optimization under population structure in 
genomic selection. Theor Appl Genet 128(1):145–158

Isidro y Sánchez J, Akdemir D (2021) Training set optimization for 
sparse phenotyping in genomic selection: a conceptual overview. 
Front Plant Sci p. 1889

Kadam DC, Rodriguez OR, Lorenz AJ (2021) Optimization of training 
sets for genomic prediction of early-stage single crosses in maize. 
Theor Appl Genet 134(2):687–699

Karaman E, Cheng H, Firat MZ, Garrick DJ, Fernando RL (2016) An 
upper bound for accuracy of prediction using GBLUP. PLoS ONE 
11(8):e0161054

Karimi K, Sargolzaei M, Plastow GS, Wang Z, Miar Y (2019) Oppor-
tunities for genomic selection in American mink: a simulation 
study. PLoS ONE 14(3):1–15

Laloë D (1993) Precision and information in linear models of genetic 

evaluation. Genet Sel Evol 25(6):557–576

Lemeunier P, Paux E, Babi S, Auzanneau J, Goudemand-Dugué E, 
Ravel  C,  Rincent  R  (2022)  Training  population  optimization 
for genomic selection improves the predictive ability of a costly 
measure in bread wheat, the gliadin to glutenin ratio. Euphytica 
218(8):1–16

Lipka AE, Lu F, Cherney JH, Buckler ES, Casler MD, Costich DE 
(2014)  Accelerating  the  switchgrass  (panicum  virgatum  l.) 
breeding cycle using genomic selection approaches. PLoS ONE 
9(11):1–7

Lorenz AJ, Smith KP (2015) Adding genetically distant individuals 
to training populations reduces genomic prediction accuracy in 
barley. Crop Sci 55(6):2657–2667

Mangin B, Rincent R, Rabier C-E, Moreau L, Goudemand-Dugue E 
(2019) Training set optimization of genomic prediction by means 
of ethacc. PLoS ONE 14(2):1–21

Mendonça LDF, Fritsche-Neto R (2020) The accuracy of different 
strategies for building training sets for genomic predictions in 
segregating soybean populations. Crop Sci 60(6):3115–3126
Meuwissen THE, Hayes BJ, Goddard ME (2001) Prediction of total 
genetic value using genome-wide dense marker maps. Genetics 
157(4):1819–1829

Momen M, Morota G (2018) Quantifying genomic connectedness and 
prediction accuracy from additive and non-additive gene actions. 
Genet Sel Evol 50(1):1–10

Neyhart JL, Tiede T, Lorenz AJ, Smith KP (2017) Evaluating methods 
of updating training data in long-term genomewide selection. G3 
Genes Genomes Genet 7(5):1499–1510

Olatoye MO, Clark LV, Labonte NR, Dong H, Dwiyanti MS, Anzoua 
KG, Brummer JE, Ghimire BK, Dzyubenko E, Dzyubenko N et al 
(2020) Training population optimization for genomic selection in 
miscanthus. G3 Genes Genomes Genet 10(7):2465–2476

Ou J-H, Liao C-T (2019) Training set determination for genomic selec-

tion. Theor Appl Genet 132(10):2781–2792

Pérez P, de los Campos G (2014) Genome-wide regression and predic-
tion with the BGLR statistical package. Genetics 198(2):483–495
Pszczola M, Strabel T, Mulder H, Calus M (2012) Reliability of direct 
genomic values for animals with different relationships within and 
to the reference population. J Dairy Sci 95(1):389–400

R Core Team (2021) R: a language and environment for statistical com-
puting. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria
Ratkowsky DA (1993) Principles of nonlinear regression modeling. J 

Ind Microbiol 12(3):195–199

Rincent R, Charcosset A, Moreau L (2017) Predicting genomic selec-
tion efficiency to optimize calibration set and to assess predic-
tion accuracy in highly structured populations. Theor Appl Genet 
130(11):2231–2247

Rincent  R,  Laloë  D,  Nicolas  S,  Altmann  T,  Brunel  D,  Revilla  P, 
Rodríguez V, Moreno-Gonzalez J, Melchinger A, Bauer E, Sch-
oen C-C, Meyer N, Giauffret C, Bauland C, Jamin P, Laborde 
J, Monod H, Flament P, Charcosset A, Moreau L (2012) Maxi-
mizing the reliability of genomic selection by optimizing the 
calibration set of reference individuals: comparison of methods 
in two diverse groups of maize inbreds (Zea mays l.). Genetics 
192(2):715–728

Rio S, Akdemir D, Carvalho T, et al. (2021a) Assessment of genomic 
prediction reliability and optimization of experimental designs in 
multi-environment trials. Theoret Appl Genet pp. 1–15

Rio S, Charcosset A, Mary-Huard T, Moreau L, Rincent R (2022) 
Building a calibration set for genomic prediction genomic pre-
dictions (GP), characteristics to be considered, and optimization 
approaches, pp. 77–112. Springer: New York

Rio S, Gallego-Sánchez L, Montilla-Bascón G, Canales FJ, Isidro y 
Sánchez J, and Prats E (2021) Genomic prediction and training set 
optimization in a structured mediterranean oat population. Theoret 
Appl Genet 134(11):3595–3609

Roth M, Muranty H, Di Guardo M, Guerra W, Patocchi A, Costa F 
(2020) Genomic prediction of fruit texture and training popula-
tion optimization towards the application of genomic selection in 
apple. Hortic Res 7(1):1–14

Sarinelli JM, Murphy JP, Tyagi P, Holland JB, Johnson JW, Mergoum 
M, Mason RE, Babar A, Harrison S, Sutton R et al (2019) Train-
ing  population  selection  and  use  of  fixed  effects  to  optimize 
genomic predictions in a historical USA winter wheat panel. 
Theor Appl Genet 132(4):1247–1261

Spindel J, Begum H, Akdemir D, Virk P, Collard B, Redoña E, Atlin 
G,  Jannink  J-L,  McCouch  SR  (2015)  Genomic  selection  and 
association mapping in rice (Oryza sativa): effect of trait genetic 
architecture, training population composition, marker number and 

1 330  Page 20 of 20

Theoretical and Applied Genetics (2023) 136:30

statistical model on accuracy of rice genomic selection in elite, 
tropical rice breeding lines. PLoS Genet 11(2):1–25

Tayeh N, Klein A, Le Paslier M-C, Jacquin F, Houtin H, Rond C, 
Chabert-Martinello M, Magnin-Robert J-B, Marget P, Aubert G 
et al (2015) Genomic prediction in pea: effect of marker density 
and training population size and composition on prediction accu-
racy. Front Plant Sci 6:941

Tsai S-F, Shen C-C, Liao C-T (2021) Bayesian optimization approaches 
for identifying the best genotype from a candidate population. J 
Agric Biol Environ Stat 26(4):519–537

VanRaden P (2008) Efficient methods to compute genomic predictions. 

J Dairy Sci 91(11):4414–4423

Xavier A, Muir WM, Rainey KM (2016) Assessing predictive proper-
ties of genome-wide selection in soybeans. G3 Genes Genomes 
Genet 6(8):2611–2616

Yu X, Leiboff S, Li X, Guo T, Ronning N, Zhang X, Muehlbauer 
GJ, Timmermans MC, Schnable PS, Scanlon MJ et al (2020) 
Genomic prediction of maize microphenotypes provides insights 
for optimizing selection and mining diversity. Plant Biotechnol J 
18(12):2456–2465

Zhang H, Yin L, Wang M, Yuan X, Liu X (2019) Factors affecting the 
accuracy of genomic selection for agricultural economic traits in 
maize, cattle, and pig populations. Front Genet 10:189

Zhao K, Tung C-W, Eizenga GC, Wright MH, Ali ML, Price AH, 
Norton GJ, Islam MR, Reynolds A, Mezey J et al (2011) Genome-
wide association mapping reveals a rich genetic architecture of 
complex traits in Oryza sativa. Nat Commun 2(1):1–10

Zhong  S,  Dekkers  JC,  Fernando  RL,  Jannink  J-L  (2009)  Factors 
affecting  accuracy  from  genomic  selection  in  populations 
derived from multiple inbred lines: a barley case study. Genetics 
182(1):355–364

Publisher's  Note  Springer  Nature  remains  neutral  with  regard  to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

1 3 
